

--- PAGE 1 ---
AIDR: Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Disaster Response
Muhammad Imran
Qatar Computing
Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
mimran@qf.org.qa
Carlos Castillo
Qatar Computing
Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
chato@acm.org
Ji Lucas
Qatar Computing
Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
jlucas@qf.org.qa
Patrick Meier
Qatar Computing
Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
patrick@irevolution.net
Sarah Vieweg
Qatar Computing
Research Institute
Doha, Qatar
svieweg@qf.org.qa
ABSTRACT
We present AIDR (Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Disaster Re-
sponse), a platform designed to perform automatic classi-
ﬁcation of crisis-related microblog communications. AIDR
enables humans and machines to work together to apply hu-
man intelligence to large-scale data at high speed.
The objective of AIDR is to classify messages that peo-
ple post during disasters into a set of user-deﬁned categories
of information (e.g., “needs”, “damage”, etc.) For this pur-
pose, the system continuously ingests data from Twitter,
processes it (i.e., using machine learning classiﬁcation tech-
niques) and leverages human-participation (through crowd-
sourcing) in real-time. AIDR has been successfully tested to
classify informative vs. non-informative tweets posted dur-
ing the 2013 Pakistan Earthquake. Overall, we achieved a
classiﬁcation quality (measured using AUC) of 80%. AIDR
is available at http://aidr.qcri.org/.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous;
D.2.2 [ Software Engineering ]: Design Tools and Tech-
niques
Keywords
Stream processing; Crowdsourcing; Classiﬁcation; Online
Machine learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Information overload during disasters can be as paralyz-
ing to humanitarian response as the absence of information.
During disasters, microblogging platforms like Twitter re-
Copyright is held by the International World Wide Web Conference Com-
mittee (IW3C2). IW3C2 reserves the right to provide a hyperlink to the
author’s site if the Material is used in electronic media.
WWW’14 Companion, April 7–11, 2014, Seoul, Korea.
ACM 978-1-4503-2745-9/14/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2567948.2577034.
Trainer 
Figure 1: AIDR: overall approach
ceive an overwhelming amount of situation-sensitive infor-
mation that people post in the form of textual messages, im-
ages, and videos. Despite the fact that social media streams
contain a signiﬁcant amount of noise, much research [9, 4]
has shown that these same streams of information also in-
clude relevant, tactical information (e.g., regarding infras-
tructure damage, needs, donations). Because social media
communications provide a rich trove of information, it is pos-
sible that even a small amount of relevant information can
greatly enhance situational awareness and help responders
and other concerned parties make more informed decision.
Finding tactical and actionable information in real time
within a rapidly growing stack of information is challeng-
ing for many reasons. For instance, performing information
extraction on short bursts of text (e.g., on 140-character
tweets) is signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult than performing the
same task on large documents such as blog posts pr news
articles [6]. Moreover, research has shown that pre-trained
classiﬁers signiﬁcantly drop in classiﬁcation accuracy when
used in diﬀerent but similar disasters [3]. This requires
learning and training new classiﬁers using fresh training data
every time a disaster strikes.
Considering the amount of information that ﬂows on Twit-
ter, it is challenging for emergency managers and other stake-
holders to investigate each individual tweet in real-time to
159

--- PAGE 2 ---
look for useful information. Therefore, our goal is to lever-
age diﬀerent machine learning techniques (e.g., information
classiﬁcation, and extraction) to perform the job automati-
cally. Moreover, we want humans (i.e. volunteers) to label
part of the incoming data to be used for the training pur-
poses of machine learning algorithms. Above all, the whole
process must be ingesting, processing and producing only
credible information in real-time, or with low latency [5].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In the next
section, we describe domain challenges in crisis response. In
section 3, we present an overview of AIDR from an end-user
perspective, as well as an evaluation. Section 4 presents
AIDR’s architecture and implementation. A demonstration
storyboard is described in section 5, followed by the conclu-
sion in section 6.
2. DOMAIN CHALLENGES IN
CRISIS RESPONSE
During disasters, social media messages provide real-time
or low-latency situational awareness information that can
enable crisis responders to be more eﬀective in their relief
eﬀorts [8]. However, diﬀerent emergency response agen-
cies are interested in diﬀerent types of messages. For in-
stance, reports of damage to infrastructures should be di-
rected to some agencies, while reports about shortages of
water and/or food should be directed to others. 1
Moreover, disaster response in its various types can be
applied during the various phases of disaster such as prepa-
ration, response and recovery. During each phase, disaster
responders require diﬀerent information. In our previous
work [1], we observed that social media response to disasters
follows the same pattern, that is, messages posted on social
media during the early phases of a disaster talk about cau-
tion & warnings, whereas messages posted during the later
phases report infrastructure damage, casualties, donations
required or available, etc.
Below, we discuss the roles of automatic computation, hu-
man computation, and the combination of the two in the
processing of social media streams.
Role of machine intelligence: Traditional information
processing cannot be employed in this model, as disaster
responders cannot wait to collect information, and then cu-
rate and classify it oﬄine. Instead, responders and other
stakeholders require real-time insight and intelligence as the
disaster unfolds. To this end, we aim to ingest and classify
social media streams in real-time through automated means
with the help of human intervention.
Role of human intelligence: When attempting to per-
form non-trivial tasks, machines alone are not capable of
great accuracy. Human intervention is required to verify,
teach, and/or correct the machine output [2]. Use of human
intelligence ﬁlls the gap for the tasks that cannot be auto-
mated, for example, providing input labels (i.e., for initial
training), correcting or validating the machine’s output (i.e.,
for performance optimization) are among the types of human
interventions. In AIDR, we aim to ﬁnd a right balance so
that the human intelligence can be used in an eﬀective way.
Combined intelligence: Relying solely on humans to in-
vestigate each individual message is challenging due to the
1The United Nations organizes its agencies into clusters:
http://business.un.org/en/documents/6852.
scale of information posted on Twitter, which goes beyond
the processing capacity of humans. To this end, an au-
tomatic approach is required that can intelligently crowd-
source messages to obtain training examples when needed,
and additionally, the system should eﬀectively use crowd-
sourcing workers both in terms of time (i.e., for volunteers)
and cost (i.e., for paid workers).
3. SYSTEMS OVERVIEW
The purpose of AIDR (Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Disaster
Response),2 is to ﬁlter and classify messages posted to social
media during humanitarian crises in real time.
Speciﬁcally, AIDR collects crisis-related messages from
Twitter3 (“tweets”), asks a crowd to label a sub-set of those
messages, and trains an automatic classiﬁer based on the
labels. It also improves the classiﬁer as more labels become
available. Automatic classiﬁcation using pre-existing train-
ing data is not a satisfactory solution because although crises
have elements in common, they also have speciﬁc aspects
which make domain adaptation diﬃcult. Crisis-speciﬁc la-
bels lead to higher accuracy than labels from past disas-
ters [3].
3.1 AIDR in action: end-user perspective
AIDR users begin by creating a collection process by en-
tering a set of keywords or a geographical region that will
be used to ﬁlter the Twitter stream, as shown in Figure
2(a). The user can monitor the collection status (e.g., to-
tal processed items, last processed item, time elapsed, etc.)
using dashboard as shown in Figure 2 (b). Next, a crowd
of annotators provide training examples: a system-selected
message plus a human-assigned label, as shown in Figure
2(c), which are then used to train classiﬁers for incoming
items, as shown in Figure 2(d).
Finally, an output of messages sorted into categories is
generated, which can be collected and used to create crisis
maps and other types of reports. An example consumer
application is the current version of CrisisTracker, 4 which
uses AIDR to enable users to slice the data by categories of
interest, which vary by deployment scenario to include for
instance eyewitness accounts, reports of violence, or reports
of damage infrastructure.
3.2 Evaluation
AIDR was successfully tested during a recent earthquake
in Pakistan in 2013. We set AIDR up to collect tweets using
the hashtags (#Pakistan, #Awaran, #Balochistan, #earth-
quake, #ReliefPK) on September 25, 2013 at 20:20:09 AST5
on a request of UN Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humani-
tarian Aﬀairs (OCHA). Within a few hours, SBTF (Standby
Task Force) 6 volunteers were asked to label whether a given
tweet was informative (i.e., if the tweet reports infrastruc-
ture damage, casualties, donation oﬀered or needed, etc.).
They tagged about 1,000 tweets approximately within 6
hours. Though the prevalence of the negative class (“not
informative”) was high, the system was able to learn from
≈200 informative labeled tweets. In this setup, we achieved
2http://aidr.qcri.org/
3http://twitter.com/
4http://ufn.virtues.fi/~jakob/yolanda/
5Arabian Standard Time
6http://blog.standbytaskforce.com/
160

--- PAGE 3 ---
(a) AIDR Collector - create collection UI 
allows users to create their collections 
by specifying keywords, geographical 
regions, language ﬁlters etc. 
(b) AIDR Collector - for a running collection 
this UI shows various parameters like, 
downloaded items, time period, 
conﬁguration history overtime etc. 
(d) AIDR Tagger - this UI shows the 
results of automatic tagging in terms 
of training elements , classiﬁed 
elements and quality etc. 
(c) AIDR Trainer - a public crowd sourcing UI 
used by volunteers to help providing labels for 
tweets which are then used by the automatic 
tagger for auto classiﬁcation. 
Figure 2: AIDR Screenshots: showing (a) collector (creation screens), (b) collector (monitoring screen), (c)
trainer, and (d) tagger.
a maximum classiﬁcation quality (in terms of AUC) up to
80%. AIDR success during the initial tests was featured
by Wired UK 7 on 30 September 2013, and by CBC 8 on 18
December 2013.
4. ARCHITECTURE & IMPLEMENTA TION
The general architecture of AIDR is shown in Figure 3.
AIDR is a free software platform that can be run as a web
application, or downloaded to create your own instance. 9
It consists of three core components; collector, tagger, and
trainer. The collector performs edge adaptation [7], and is
responsible for data collection. For instance, in our current
setup it collects messages from Twitter using the Twitter
streaming API. The collected tweets are then passed to the
tagger for further processing. The tagger is responsible for
the classiﬁcation of each individual tweet. The tagger is
comprised of three modules: feature extractor, learner, and
classiﬁer. First, the feature extractor receives a tweet, it
extracts features (e.g., uni-grams and bi-grams), and passes
it to the classiﬁer. Second, the classiﬁer’s job is to assign
one of the user-deﬁned categories (e.g., donations, damage,
7http://www.webcitation.org/6N9iZuG1E
8http://fw.to/QM0Lqnl
9https://github.com/qcri-social/AIDR
casualties, etc.) to the tweet. To do so, the classiﬁer uses the
learner module, which requires suﬃcient training examples
to learn about each user-deﬁned category.
The training examples required by the system can be ob-
tained either using internal web-based interface or by call-
ing an external crowdsourcing platform. The former aims
at enabling the collection owner to provide trusted training
examples, whereas the latter collects training examples us-
ing public crowdsourcing with the help of volunteers. We
assume that there is a ﬁxed budget of crowdsourcing work,
but even if that is not the case, we see this as a problem of
cost eﬀectiveness. To ensure quality, training examples are
obtained in a way that maximizes marginal quality gains per
human label. The maximization of quality gains per label is
done by performing intelligent task generation by selecting
a small set of messages to be labeled by humans. Details
on AIDR crowdsourcing part and task generation strategies
are discussed in detail in our additional research [2].
The output of AIDR (i.e., classiﬁed tweets) can be ac-
cessed through output adapters, which are exposed as an
API. To show real-time classiﬁed items on a map or any
other visualization widget, one can use AIDR’s live stream
output adapter. Moreover, to fulﬁll various visualization de-
mands, AIDR includes APIs to retrieve the k-latest items or
to subscribe to a live data feed.
161

--- PAGE 4 ---
Tweets collector 
query 
Administrator UI 
API API
Trainer 
(PyBossa)
API
Features 
extractor 
Classiﬁer 
Learner Trainer 
(for trusted users) 
API
Crowdsourcing UI 
PyBossa DB 
Collector DB 
Tagger DB 
client 
server 
Output 
adapters 
tweets 
OAuth 
crowdsourcing workers administrator 
AIDR Tagger 
AIDR Trainer 
- Collections 
- Users & roles 
... 
- Training data 
- Test data 
... 
Twitter streaming API 
AIDR Collector 
- Task info 
- Workers 
... 
Figure 3: AIDR architecture shows Collector, T rainer, and T agger
Implementation: AIDR comprised of a client-side and
three server-side applications. Mainly, the client-side ap-
plication has been developed using the Sencha ExtJS frame-
work10, and the server-side implementation is developed us-
ing Java and the Springs 3.0 framework for the main applica-
tion logic. We use PyBossa for the crowdsourcing processing
purposes, and REDIS11 for the communication ﬂows. AIDR
is an open-source platform, and its source code is available
at this repository 12.
5. DEMONSTRA TION
A live demo will be presented starting from an introduc-
tion of the crisis computing domain and motivation behind
the development of AIDR platform. A guided walk-through
of the platform will be presented to introduce how diﬀerent
components of AIDR work. After demonstrating how to cre-
ate collections, perform training, and enable an automatic
classiﬁcation process, we ask our reader to try the tool and
create their own collection and perform classiﬁcation with-
out using any knowledge of machine learning.
6. CONCLUSIONS
Social media platforms like Twitter receive an overwhelm-
ing amount of situational awareness information. For emer-
gency response, real-time disaster insights are important.
Finding actionable and tactical information in real-time poses
serious challenges. Eﬀective coordination of human and ma-
chine intelligence can improve disaster response eﬀorts. In
this paper, we have described AIDR, a platform to clas-
sify Twitter messages into a set of user-deﬁned situational
awareness categories in real-time. The platform combines
human and machine intelligence to obtain labels of a subset
of messages and trains an automatic classiﬁer to classify fur-
ther posts. The platform uses active learning approach to
select potential messages to tag, and learns continuously to
increase classiﬁcation accuracy when new training examples
are available.
10http://www.sencha.com/products/extjs/
11http://redis.io/
12https://github.com/qcri-social/AIDR
7. REFERENCES
[1] S. R. Chowdhury, M. Imran, M. R. Asghar,
S. Amer-Yahia, and C. Castillo. Tweet4act: Using
incident-speciﬁc proﬁles for classifying crisis-related
messages. In Proc. of ISCRAM , Baden-Baden,
Germany, 2013.
[2] M. Imran, C. Castillo, J. Lucas, M. Patrick, and
J. Rogstadius. Coordinating human and machine
intelligence to classify microblog communications in
crises. Proc. of ISCRAM , 2014.
[3] M. Imran, S. Elbassuoni, C. Castillo, F. Diaz, and
P. Meier. Practical extraction of disaster-relevant
information from social media. In Proc. of Workshop on
Social Media Data for Disaster Management , WWW
’13 Companion, pages 1021–1024. ACM/IW3C2, 2013.
[4] M. Imran, S. M. Elbassuoni, C. Castillo, F. Diaz, and
P. Meier. Extracting information nuggets from
disaster-related messages in social media. In Proc. of
ISCRAM, Baden-Baden, Germany, 2013.
[5] M. Imran, I. Lykourentzou, and C. Castillo.
Engineering crowdsourced stream processing systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1310.5463 , 2013.
[6] C. Li, J. Weng, Q. He, Y. Yao, A. Datta, A. Sun, and
B.-S. Lee. Twiner: named entity recognition in targeted
twitter stream. In Proceedings of the 35th international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 721–730. ACM, 2012.
[7] D. Turaga, H. Andrade, B. Gedik, C. Venkatramani,
O. Verscheure, J. D. Harris, J. Cox, W. Szewczyk, and
P. Jones. Design principles for developing stream
processing applications. Software: Practice and
Experience, 40(12):1073–1104, 2010.
[8] S. Vieweg. Microblogged contributions to the
emergency arena: Discovery, interpretation and
implications. In Proc. of CSCW, February 2010.
[9] S. E. Vieweg. Situational awareness in mass emergency:
A behavioral and linguistic analysis of microblogged
communications. 2012.
162