

--- PAGE 1 ---
International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Information Management Data 
Insights 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jjimei 
Using artiﬁcial intelligence to identify emergency messages on social media 
during a natural disaster: A deep learning approach 
Courtney J. Powers a , ∗ , Ashwin Devaraj b , Kaab Ashqeen c , Aman Dontula b , Amit Joshi b , 
Jayanth Shenoy d , Dhiraj Murthy e 
a Department of Communication, College of Arts, and Communication, The University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, 180 North Prairie Street, Whitewater, WI 53190, United 
States 
b Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, United States 
c Department of Mathematics, The University of Texas at Austin, United States 
d Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, United States 
e School of Journalism and Media, The University of Texas at Austin, United States 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords: 
Machine learning 
Computational methods 
Twitter 
Supervised learning 
Disaster 
Crisis communication 
Artiﬁcial intelligence 
a b s t r a c t 
During natural disasters, emergency communication systems become overloaded, and people are forced to turn 
to social media to make requests for help. This study employs machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence to 
automatically detect, identify, and categorize tweets relevant to ﬁrst responders during Hurricane Harvey. We 
curate a dataset of tweets, present a labeling scheme based on relevance and urgency, and develop neural and 
non-neural machine learning models to automatically categorize tweets. Our best relevance classiﬁers, language 
models BERT and XLNet, perform signiﬁcantly better than non-neural models and the deep convolutional neu- 
ral network (CNN) and achieve comparable F1 scores. Ultimately, this study furthers machine learning and crisis 
communication research by developing methods to automatically categorize tweets that can signal to ﬁrst respon- 
ders of individuals’ requests for help in urgent, life-threatening disasters. Our work also ﬁnds large pretrained 
language models promising for the development of well-performing disaster tweet classiﬁers in future work. 
1. Introduction 
With climate change, hurricanes are becoming more intense 
and destructive on average, and they are projected to get worse 
( Berardelli, 2019 ; Knutson et al., 2015 ). Yale Climate Connections pin- 
points major hurricanes to be the costliest natural weather-related dis- 
aster, both in expenses of damages and casualties, often due to the ex- 
treme winds, rainfall, and resulting ﬂooding ( Berardelli, 2019 ). In nat- 
ural disaster situations like major hurricanes, thousands of people may 
ﬁnd themselves needing urgent, life-saving help, such as evacuation as- 
sistance and/or medical attention. However, when major hurricanes hit, 
it is not uncommon for emergency response dispatch systems (like US- 
based 9–1-1 call centers) to become overloaded, making it nearly impos- 
sible for individuals to request and have access to the emergency help 
they need ( Jorgensen, 2017 ; Rhodan, 2017 ). 
When disaster strikes and traditional forms of emergency commu- 
nication, such as 9–1–1 systems are overloaded, individuals are forced 
to use whatever means available to communicate and seek help from 
others ( Rhodan, 2017 ; Glass, 2001 ). Often, the technology that is read- 
ily available and familiar is social media sites and applications, such 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: powersc@uww.edu (C.J. Powers) . 
as Twitter. Previous work ﬁnds that individuals use social media dur- 
ing disasters in attempts to communicate, connect, and even coordi- 
nate rescue and resource eﬀorts ( Akter & Wamba, 2017 ; Devaraj et al., 
2020 ; Guo, Liu, Wu, & Zhang, 2021 ; Kumar et al., 2020 ; Lindsay, 2011 ; 
Paul, 2015 ; Rhodan, 2017 ; Tim, Pan, Ractham, & Kaewkitipong, 2017 ), 
and this continues to remain true with 9–1–1 disruptions that accom- 
panied the devastating Hurricane Ian that hit recently in the fall of 
2022 ( Ives & Yoon, 2022 ). When Hurricane Harvey made landfall on 
the coast of Texas in August 2017 and created catastrophic ﬂooding, this 
was no diﬀerent ( Devaraj et al., 2020 ; Rachunok, Fan, Lee, Nateghi, & 
Mostafavi, 2022 ; Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 2019 ; 
Smith et al., 2018 ; Yang et al., 2017 ); thousands of people turned to 
Twitter to connect with others, share information, and even request ur- 
gent help during the deadly and record-breaking storm. 
Given that social media has been an instrumental communication 
tool in connecting people in emergency situations, as previous research 
suggests ( Ahn et al., 2021 ; Kim & Hastak, 2018 ; Lindsay, 2011 ; Murthy & 
Longwell, 2013 ; Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 2019 ; 
Yang et al., 2017 ), it is more important than ever to develop data min- 
ing and information systems techniques that help responders identify 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2023.100164 
Received 30 June 2022; Received in revised form 3 February 2023; Accepted 6 February 2023 
2667-0968/©2023  The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 


--- PAGE 2 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
urgent calls for help. Additionally, Ahn et al. (2021) found that tweets 
related to support and disaster preparedness posted by individuals re- 
ceive more engagement than even tweets from government institutions, 
highlighting the need for tools that can analyze tweets from the general 
public at scale. Machine learning methods can be especially valuable in 
this quest, as they can be used to automatically identify and categorize 
communication on social media that indicates individuals in need. As a 
result, this study uses machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, and infor- 
mation systems techniques to explore the following research questions: 
• RQ1: How can machine learning be used to identify tweets relevant 
to emergency response in a natural disaster? 
• RQ2: How can machine learning be used to categorically encode 
diﬀerent levels of relevance to emergency response in a natural dis- 
aster? 
This research speciﬁcally examines communication on Twitter dur- 
ing a major disaster such as Hurricane Harvey, with the goal of develop- 
ing and testing the eﬀectiveness of training models to detect and catego- 
rize tweets and information relevant to ﬁrst responders. This research 
aims to identify calls for help among the many other tweets through 
automatic algorithmic categorization that can ultimately be used to sig- 
nal to ﬁrst responder operations of what tweets are requests for help 
in urgent, life-threatening disaster situations. In the following sections, 
we will ﬁrst introduce Hurricane Harvey as the unique disaster con- 
text, then we will discuss the previous literature about Twitter use and 
data mining tweets during disasters, summarize research questions, the 
methodology, and the results. Finally, the paper will conclude with a dis- 
cussion of the ﬁndings, implications, and directions for future research. 
1.1. Hurricane Harvey overview 
Hurricane Harvey made landfall along the mid-Texas coast on Au- 
gust 24, 2017 as a category four hurricane with winds of 130 miles per 
hour ( Blake & Zelinsky, 2018 ; Carter, 2018 ). The storm caused catas- 
trophic ﬂooding throughout southeastern Texas, aﬀecting the greater 
Houston area ( Blake & Zelinsky, 2018 ). According to Blake & Zelin- 
sky, 2018 report for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis- 
tration, Hurricane Harvey was “the most signiﬁcant tropical cyclone 
rainfall event in United States history both in scope and peak rainfall 
amounts ”and caused damage to thousands of homes and businesses (p. 
6). While many people were asked to evacuate in preparation for the 
storm, many who did not became trapped and required rescue due to 
dangerous rising ﬂoodwaters. By August 31, 2017, FEMA reported that 
federal forces had rescued over 10,000 people ( Gallagher, 2017 ). This 
storm, along with the record-breaking rain and ﬂooding, led to an esti- 
mated $125 billion worth of damage and tragically resulted in at least 
68 deaths ( NOAA, 2018 ; Blake & Zelinsky, 2018 ). 
2. Review of the literature 
2.1. Twitter use and its role in disasters 
Within a large disaster situation, communication challenges can 
arise. Traditional forms of communication, such as the US-based 9–1–
1 emergency system, can fail due to an overwhelming inﬂux of calls 
( Rhodan, 2017 ; Glass, 2001 ), and people can lose touch with family and 
friends in the midst of evacuating. According to Glass (2001) , emergency 
systems like U.S.’s 9–1–1 were never set up to handle the inﬂux of calls 
that result in a large-scale natural disaster situation. And, in some cases, 
disaster victims may turn to social media as their ﬁrst venue for assis- 
tance, not even trying to use 9–1–1 ( Stephens, Robertson, & Murthy, 
2019 ). 
According to Palen and Hughes (2010) , social media, such as Twit- 
ter, provides the opportunity for individuals to communicate, connect, 
share and seek information, and even coordinate rescue and relief eﬀorts 
during disasters. Historically, Twitter as an online microblog has been 
particularly useful for sharing brief text and images during disasters 
( Murthy, 2018 ; Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 2019 ). 
Given the widespread global use of social media and its ease of use on 
both mobile and desktop platforms, Twitter has become a prominent 
medium of communication ( Pew Research Center, 2018 ; Rathore, Kar, 
& Ilavarasan, 2017 ), especially in disaster situations when other com- 
munication channels like emergency helplines can have limited eﬃcacy. 
Since Twitter’s emergence in 2007, Twitter has been used in diﬀerent 
disasters ( Murthy, 2018 ), and research is beginning to analyze tweets 
posted during and after disasters through data mining software tech- 
niques ( Akter & Wamba, 2017 ; Devaraj et al., 2020 ; Rachunok, Fan, Lee, 
Nateghi, & Mostafavi, 2022 ). Twitter, as a multi-media platform, allows 
users the opportunity to share and reply to short text-based messages 
and see content from other users on their ever-updating user dashboard 
( Spence, Lachlan, Lin, & del Greco, 2015 ). Previous research about dis- 
asters found that people use Twitter to share news and information, 
reactions and feelings, and even call for help ( Devaraj et al., 2020 ; 
Lindsay, 2011 ; Paul, 2015 ; Spence, Lachlan, Lin, & del Greco, 2015 ; 
Yang et al., 2017 ). 
2.2. Using Twitter as a tool to call for help 
For the purpose of this paper, the deﬁnition of a “call for help ”o n 
Twitter is largely based on Paul (2015) ’s work and is deﬁned as a person 
issuing a tweet on Twitter during a disaster to request help, rescue, med- 
ical assistance, or information for themselves or for someone else who 
they believe is aﬀected by the disaster. Many studies have explored so- 
cial media use during disasters, but only a handful of studies, some of 
which are highlighted here, have speciﬁcally addressed calls for help 
and rescue on Twitter during a disaster and leveraged data mining tech- 
niques. For example, in their study of social media use in a Japanese 
earthquake and tsunami, Peary, Shaw, & Takeuchi, 2012 found individ- 
uals used Twitter to communicate whether they were safe or unsafe, and 
there were even several “calls for help. ”Similarly, in a study of the On- 
doy Typhoon ﬂooding, Morales (2010) collected Twitter data and found 
that people used Twitter to make a call for help or rescue, explaining that 
“during Ondoy, users sent a variety of messages pertaining to individual 
calls for rescue and evacuation and the need for material donations, ef- 
fectively transforming Twitter from a mere platform of social exchange, 
into an active facilitator of relief and rescue ”(2010, p. 57). A more re- 
cent study by David et al. (2016) also found evidence that Twitter was 
used for rescue coordination in Typhoon Haiyan, noting that, of the total 
Spritzer level data that was collected around the disaster and classiﬁed 
as disaster relief, 12% were tweets about personal acts of disaster re- 
lief, 67% were tweets about relief activities others engaged in, 8% were 
tweets about asking for help, and 54% were tweets that attempted to co- 
ordinate assistance. Furthermore, because of the use of Twitter for calls 
of help and rescue coordination, David et al. (2016) consider Twitter to 
be an important “…venue for mobilizing relief and response on a global 
scale ”in disaster situations (p. 2). Given the previous research, it is clear 
that Twitter has been used to make calls for help during disasters. Next, 
we will discuss past research in the domain of disaster tweet classiﬁ- 
cation and limited extant data mining research about calls for help on 
social media during the speciﬁc disaster of focus, Hurricane Harvey. 
2.3. Twitter data mining and calls for help during Hurricane Harvey 
Researchers have used text-mining and classiﬁcation techniques 
to understand Twitter data throughout the years ( Kumar, Kar, & 
Ilavarasan, 2021 ; Neogi et al., 2021 ). In fact, research has been 
done in the realm of disaster tweet text-mining and classiﬁca- 
tion, with research using a wide variety of feature representations 
of the tweets, such as n-gram and part-of-speech (POS) features 
( Ashktorab et al., 2014 ; Imran et al., 2013 , 2016 ). For example, 
Ashktorab et al. (2014) trained logistic regression models on unigram 
features to determine whether tweets from multiple disasters contained 
2 


--- PAGE 3 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
information regarding infrastructural damage or human casualties. Ad- 
ditionally, Imran et al. (2016) built SVM, random forest, and naive Bayes 
models to classify tweets from various natural disasters (e.g., ﬂoods and 
earthquakes) into diﬀerent information categories, such as whether a 
tweet contains information about injured or deceased individuals, dis- 
placed individuals, sympathy and emotional support, and irrelevant 
topics. Furthermore, Imran et al. (2013) built a naive Bayes classiﬁer 
trained on n-gram and POS features to classify tweets from the 2011 tor- 
nado in Joplin, Missouri as informative or not, and also built a classiﬁer 
to categorize the informative tweets as “caution, ”“donation, ”“advice, ”
or “information source ”. 
While some previous research focusing on classifying disaster-related 
tweets has used n-grams and POS features, they are not without limita- 
tions. The primary shortcoming of the “traditional ”n - g r a m and POS 
features is that they are sparse since their respective feature vectors are 
high-dimensional and most entries are 0. For example, if a feature vector 
is created with each position corresponding to a unique bigram found 
in a dataset of tweets, a given tweet only contains a very small num- 
ber of those bigrams and thus has a sparse feature vector. A more ro- 
bust representation of words is embeddings, which are derived from the 
ﬁrst layer of a neural network trained on some language understand- 
ing task, like predicting the distribution over possible next words in a 
language given an n-gram ( Bengio et al., 2003 ). Word embeddings are 
a particularly good representation of words since they are not sparse 
and geometrically encode the semantic relationships between words. 
This means that words with similar meanings have embeddings with 
a small angle of separation, whereas those that are more semantically 
dissimilar have a larger angle of separation. As a result, more recent 
work in disaster tweet classiﬁcation leverages deep neural networks 
trained on word embeddings ( Nguyen et al. 2016 ; Burel et al., 2018 ). 
Burel et al. (2018) used the convolutional neural network (CNN) clas- 
siﬁer developed by Kim (2014) to classify tweets from the CrisisLex26 
dataset ( Olteanu et al., 2014 ) based on relevance, disaster type, and 
information type. Nguyen et al. (2016) also used a similar CNN archi- 
tecture on crisis-related datasets to classify whether tweets were useful 
to ﬁrst responders. 
Recently, there has also been some tweet-classiﬁcation research spe- 
ciﬁc to Hurricane Harvey. Given the uniqueness of Harvey, both in 
the scale of destruction as well as the unprecedented levels of volun- 
teer rescues, research has speciﬁcally explored how social media was 
used to make calls for help. According to Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, 
Smith, & Stephens, 2019 , Twitter had 2.46 billion users during the time 
of Hurricane Harvey. Robertson et al. explain that Harvey was consid- 
ered “a unique natural disaster in which Twitter and other social media 
provided citizens with a platform to communicate urgent information 
quickly that ultimately led to life-saving rescues for those who were 
ﬂooded ”(2019, p. 6; Stephens et al., 2018 ). 
In their study, Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 
2019 speciﬁcally examined Twitter and calls for help during Hurricane 
Harvey, looking exclusively at images tweeted before, during, and after 
the landfall of the storm. Robertson and colleagues used a mixed-method 
approach to compare the accuracy of human-coded and machine-coded 
images. By using a deep learning VGG-16 convolutional neural network, 
along with a construction of multilayered perceptron classiﬁers for clas- 
sifying the urgency and time period for a given image, Robertson, John- 
son, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 2019 found that computerized methods 
can be used to “ﬁlter through the noise on social media and identify au- 
thentic calls for help or urgent situations during a disaster ”(p. 29). 
Yang et al. (2017) also studied tweets during Hurricane Har- 
vey, this time looking speciﬁcally at the text, instead of images. 
Yang et al. (2017) argue that 9–1–1 call centers can only serve a certain 
number of people who need help at a time, as can rescuers with boats 
during Hurricane Harvey. Because resources are limited and people’s 
lives are in danger, their study aimed to identify and prioritize those in 
need. Yang et al. (2017) manually labeled 1000 tweets to train a model 
to be able to identify tweets that had requests for rescue. Their objec- 
tive was to triage levels of need by using a ’scheduling algorithm’ to 
try to optimize resource allocation to those who need it most based on 
tweet data. In their study, 70% of the coded data was used for training, 
while the rest was used for validation. Their best-performing support 
vector machine classiﬁer has an F-measure of 0.687 and accuracy of 
0.93, meaning that they had achieved some success in classifying tweets 
with their relatively small dataset. 
Similar to Yang et al. (2017) and Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, 
& Stephens, 2019 , Kumar et al. (2020) also leveraged data mining, 
proposing a multi-modal machine learning model to categorize tweets 
that contained both text and images from multiple disasters including 
Hurricane Harvey. Kumar et al. (2020) speciﬁcally aimed to categorize 
tweets as informative for the disaster or not, and they deﬁned infor- 
mative tweets as being text or image posts containing requests for help 
for themselves or missing relatives, reports of damage, injuries, and/or 
death. In their study, they used an LSTM and VGG-16 for tweets with 
text and images and achieved F1 scores ranging between 0.74 and 0.93 
across datasets from diﬀerent natural disasters. 
2.4. Research questions 
Previous research found machine learning is eﬀective in man- 
aging data from tweets related to disasters ( O’Neal et al., 2018 ), 
with Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 2019 , 
Yang et al. (2017) and Kumar et al. (2020) ﬁnding relevant disas- 
ter tweets, including calls for help during Hurricane Harvey, can be 
identiﬁed through deep learning methods and automatic categorization 
methods. This research only incorporates Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, 
Smith, & Stephens, 2019 and Kumar et al.’s (2020) research by using 
a coding category technique, but it also expands upon the ﬁndings of 
Yang et al. (2017) by using a larger Twitter dataset from Hurricane 
Harvey. While Yang et al. (2017) tried to triage levels of need by using 
a scheduling algorithm, we are optimizing the part of identifying tweets 
relevant to rescue/rescuing itself rather than optimization within. By 
using a computational machine learning method, along with detailed 
preprocessing steps to improve model performance, this study applies 
to similar categories identiﬁed in Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, 
& Stephens, 2019 and Kumar et al.’s (2020) study, as well as draws 
upon other categories regarding how individuals use Twitter to make 
calls for help in Hurricane Harvey. We apply various preprocessing 
techniques in order to help parse out important tweets from the large 
amount of data generated on Twitter, so our machine learning models 
can be eﬀective in detecting and categorizing tweets that are relevant 
to ﬁrst responders. 
Ultimately, by using a computational and machine learning ap- 
proach, the goal of this research is to determine how machine learning 
can be used to identify tweets relevant to emergency response in a natu- 
ral disaster and ultimately train a computer to automatically be able to 
identify calls for help in . Therefore, we explore the following research 
questions: 
RQ1: How can machine learning be used to identify tweets relevant 
to emergency response in a natural disaster? 
RQ2: How can machine learning be used to categorically encode dif- 
ferent levels of relevance to emergency response in a natural dis- 
aster? 
3. Method 
Using established and tested methods that apply machine learning 
techniques to categorize textual tweets during previous hurricane events 
(e.g. Ashktorab et al. 2014 ; Imran et al. 2014 ), we explore how Twit- 
ter was used during Hurricane Harvey and whether Twitter was used to 
make calls for help. We ﬁrst performed a preliminary pilot data analysis 
in order to better understand the dataset. Then, we embarked on a multi- 
phase labeling process similar to previous research ( Wadud et al. (2022) . 
3 


--- PAGE 4 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
Following previous work using machine learning on disaster-related 
tweets ( Derczynski et al., 2018 ; Morstatter et al., 2014 ), we manually 
coded a subset of the tweets as a team for the purpose of building, train- 
ing, and ﬁne-tuning a machine-learned model. Afterward, we deployed 
a larger subset of 4000 tweets on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) 
for additional human coding to be used to reﬁne the computer-based 
model, with the goal of making a more accurate classiﬁer. We employ 
this crowd-based process of creating a much larger training set of la- 
beled tweets based on recommendations from other successful studies 
( Appling et al., 2014 ; Li et al., 2015 ) aimed at classifying disaster-related 
tweets. 
3.1. Data annotation and collection 
3.1.1. The raw dataset 
This study used a dataset collected at the University of North Texas 
(UNT) which contains 7,041,866 total tweets related to the Hurricane 
Harvey disaster and was created using the ‘twarc’ tweet archiving pack- 
age via Twitter’s API ( Phillips, 2017 ). The data was collected from 
the Texas-speciﬁc location coordinates (similar to Zou et al., 2019 ) 
over 08/18/17 - 09/22/17, during which Hurricane Harvey made land- 
fall and impacted the greater Houston area. The dataset is derived 
from API searches based on seven hashtags and three additional key- 
words that were included in the search query to collect the Twitter 
data ( Phillips, 2017 ). These keywords include: #Harvey, #Harvey2017, 
#HarveyStorm, #HoustonFlood, #HoustonFlooding, #HoustonFloods, 
#HurricaneHarvey, #GulfCoast, Hurricane Harvey, and Twitter. This 
data collection aligns with the guidelines and ﬁndings set forth by 
Rachunok, Fan, Lee, Nateghi, & Mostafavi, 2022 , as this data set oﬀers 
the beneﬁts of being both relevant location-based and keyword search- 
based. 
3.1.2. Initial ﬁltration by keywords 
Because tweets during disaster events are both high volume and rife 
with non-relevant posts ( Derczynski et al., 2018 ), we ﬁltered the orig- 
inal set of 7 million tweets down to a dataset of around 300,000 by 
only including tweets that contained at least one word or phrase related 
to help, rescue, emergency, damage, ﬂooding, and emergency respon- 
ders (based on a comprehensive list of 41 relevant words and phrases 
created by the research team), and did not include words related to do- 
nations. This ﬁltering helped ameliorate the bias toward non-relevant 
tweets when searching for catchall hashtags such as #Harvey and in- 
crease our chance of coding the types of tweets relevant to our research 
questions. 
3.1.3. Coding categories 
For the purpose of this study, we had two main coding categories–
relevance and urgency. While the UNT data should ideally be relevant 
to Hurricane Harvey based on the data collection hashtags, not all of the 
data in the over seven million tweet dataset, or even our ﬁltered subset, 
was relevant to the hurricane or our research questions. As a result, we 
relied on Paul’s (2015) coding structure to determine relevant tweets, 
which was used by Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 
2019 study. 
Paul’s (2015) typology of social media posts during disasters 
guided what we deemed relevant or not relevant, and it is comprised 
of the following categories: request, report, and reaction, or none. 
Paul’s (2015) coding typology, which indicated relevant tweets, is a 
good ﬁt for our study because it pertains to potential calls for help and 
information that would be relevant to ﬁrst responders. 
For example, Paul’s (2015) “request ”c a t e g o r y is essentially a “call 
for help. ” Over the duration of the study, this deﬁnition was adapted 
and simpliﬁed to “Asking for help or information as a result of Hurri- 
cane Harvey, ”w i t h the exclusion of “Donations in the form of money 
or news sources. ”I t is important to note that in this category, we left 
the request category relatively loose to account for calls for help for 
one’s self and calls for help for others who they may feel are in danger 
and in need of rescuing. This is important because calls for help and 
rescue can go beyond just the individual person ( Irman et al., 2013 ; 
Morales, 2010 ), because those in immediate danger may not have the 
ability to tweet, and may rely on others to do so for them. The sec- 
ond coding category from Paul’s (2015) typology is “report, ”a n d this 
was meant to capture reported thoughts and experiences pertaining to 
Hurricane Harvey. This deﬁnition was adapted to “Reporting damage, 
updates, injuries or deaths from Hurricane Harvey ”and excluded news 
sources. The third coding category from Paul’s (2015) typology is “reac- 
tion, ”a n d this was meant to assess individuals’ feelings, opinions, and 
thoughts about emergency response workers and volunteers. This code 
was also adapted and shortened to read “Referring to or talking about 
performance or eﬀectiveness of emergency responders or volunteers. ”
While only one category was labeled “request, ”a l l of the categories 
broadly include potential calls for help; therefore, all three categories 
were combined in the coding process and subsumed under the parent 
category of “relevant ”. 
The last category for relevance was none, and this was meant to 
capture any tweets that were not relevant. Tweets asking for donations 
to diﬀerent organizations like the Red Cross and most news sources fell 
into this category. While data was coded into these typology categories, 
we decided to focus on the classiﬁer of relevant or not relevant, as all 
three categories, by deﬁnition, could include information relevant to 
calls for help and emergency responders. 
For the sake of this study, though tweets were labeled with multiple 
relevance categories in mind, when building classiﬁers, we only tackle 
the binary relevance classiﬁcation task. In other words, we treat all the 
“none ”c a t e g o r y tweets as “not relevant ”a n d everything else as “rel- 
evant. ”W e do this to establish baseline results and determine which 
kinds of models are suitable for this classiﬁcation task. We leave the 
multi-class relevancy classiﬁcation task for future work. 
The second main coding category that we used was level of urgency. 
Guided by Morales (2010) , we believe that calls for help include some 
type of urgency, information about where the person is who needs help, 
and some type of call to action. In the low cues Twitter environment, 
Morales explains that urgency can be expressed through a variety of 
diﬀerent textual elements including “exclamation marks, direct calls for 
‘help!’, ”as well as the use of key verbs, or calls to action, such as “‘rescue’ 
and ‘need’ ”(2010, p. 39). 
In our initial round of team coding, we had three levels of ur- 
gency, which were not urgent, somewhat urgent, and highly urgent. 
Only tweets that were classiﬁed as relevant based on Paul’s (2015) cat- 
egories of request, report, and reaction were then examined and coded 
for urgency. Eventually, these coding categories were reﬁned and dis- 
tilled down into two categories: urgent and not urgent, for the sake of 
making it more clear for MTurk workers to be able to classify tweets. 
This simply asked the user to determine if the tweet “is suggesting that 
someone’s life in danger? ”with a response of yes or no. This deﬁnition 
was purposely left open for interpretation with regards to the one being 
impacted or in danger, as we wanted to include situations when people 
are tweeting about things for themselves or on behalf of others. 
3.1.4. Manually labeling a small dataset 
After we completed data preprocessing and ﬁltration (steps de- 
scribed following sections) we, as the research team, met and hand- 
coded a subset of a random sample of 2000 tweets. For the purpose of 
coding, single tweets were considered the unit-of-analysis for classiﬁca- 
tion since they are in essence microblogs with short bursts of informa- 
tion ( Ovadia, 2009 ). We followed Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, 
& Stephens, 2019 approach and categorized textual tweets based on rel- 
evance per Paul’s (2015) typology of social media posts during disasters. 
Any tweets that were classiﬁed into a “request, ”“report, ”or “reaction, ”
were considered relevant and further examined for the level of urgency. 
In the coding process, we all met as a team and coded 150 tweets to- 
gether to establish a baseline procedure. After, we split into three pairs 
4 


--- PAGE 5 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
and each person in the pair independently coded around 445 tweets. 
In total, our team coded 1489 of the 2000 randomly-selected tweets, 
and we had a strong inter-coder reliability of 95.6%. These 1489 tweets 
were used for our preliminary model selection. 
3.1.5. Crowdsourced labeling of a larger dataset 
One of the shortcomings with the original hand-labeled was the class 
imbalance: only 25.6% of the tweets were relevant and only 13.6% of 
the tweets were urgent. Initially, this led many of the weaker models 
to output mostly negative predictions, resulting in accuracies close to 
the proportion of negative tweets in the dataset. We hypothesized that 
providing a more balanced dataset to the classiﬁers would prevent this 
behavior and result in better ﬁtting models. 
To obtain a more balanced dataset of tweets with relevance labels, 
we submitted a total of 4000 tweets to Amazon’s MTurk for rapid, 
crowd-sourced labeling. To make sure that the dataset submitted to 
MTurk would have a higher percentage of relevant and urgent tweets, 
we took tweets from the original dataset of 1.4 million minus the 1489 
that were hand-labeled and ran them sequentially through the multi- 
layer perceptron classiﬁer trained on the 1489 hand-labeled tweets until 
2400 tweets were encountered that the classiﬁer predicted to be positive 
and 1600 were encountered that the classiﬁer predicted to be negative. 
The multilayer perceptron was chosen for this ﬁltering process since it 
had the highest recall (see the Evaluation Metrics section) of all the pre- 
liminary classiﬁers. Before submitting all 4000 tweets to MTurk, 100 
of them were used in trial runs to ensure MTurk functioned properly 
and that our labeling categories were correctly interpreted by MTurk 
workers. 
On MTurk, the categorization of each tweet is known as a Human 
Intelligence Task (HIT), which is a small task that MTurk workers can 
complete for a few cents each ( Little et al., 2009 ). For our HITs, we 
deployed an MTurk survey that randomized tweets and prompted two 
people to code each tweet. A worker was asked to read descriptions for 
relevance, which were displayed on the top of the survey, and was then 
asked to code a tweet. After, they were presented with binary coding 
categories for urgency (urgency and not urgent). MTurk workers were 
compensated $.03 per coded tweet. We assigned 3 MTurk workers to 
each tweet and only decided to keep the tweets in which at least 2 of 
the 3 workers gave the same relevance and urgency labels. This ensured 
that very ambiguous tweets with no aﬃrmed label would not add noise 
to our ﬁnal dataset. 
After looking at the preliminary results and analyzing the amount of 
time workers spent, as well as the rating the workers had, it was clear 
that most people were not experienced MTurk workers and they did not 
spend time fully reading the categories. As a result, we made changes 
to the format of the HITs with the goal of making it more user-friendly 
to MTurk workers. 
For the second coding deployment on MTurk, the coding categories 
were simpliﬁed to the deﬁnitions (discussed above) for relevance and 
urgency. Additionally, the coding descriptions were removed from the 
top of the survey and were placed as answer responses under each tweet 
to increase the likelihood that the participants would read the code de- 
scription. We also changed the settings to allow only experienced MTurk 
workers to complete the HITs, called MTurk Masters. This ensured that 
only coders who have a high approval rate would receive our HITs. We 
tested these changes by releasing the same 100 tweets to be coded by 
at least three MTurk Masters each. Results were more promising, so we 
released the remaining tweets to be coded. MTurk workers were com- 
pensated between $.02 and $.05 per tweet. Similar to Khanday, Rabani, 
Khan, & Malik, 2022 and Prasad, Udeme, Misra, & Bisallah, 2023 re- 
search involving machine learning and tweet categorization, having the 
assistance of human annotators was a necessary step in being able to 
ultimately train machine learning models. 
3.1.6. Creating ﬁnal datasets 
The ﬁnal step in the creation of our datasets was to split the 4078 
tweets (obtained from our manual labeling and ﬁltered from MTurk) 
into a train set and test set for relevance and urgency. We made the split 
so that both datasets would have the same fraction of relevant or urgent 
tweets. The 4078 tweets consisted of 50% relevant tweets but only 5.7% 
urgent tweets. We determined that 5.7% was too low of a percentage of 
urgent tweets for our models to feasibly learn to detect urgent tweets, 
even with oversampling,. As a result, we decided to sample a subset of 
1160 tweets, in which 25% were urgent, and then we created the train- 
test split on that sample. 
3.2. Data preprocessing 
3.2.1. Model name conventions 
For clarity going forward, we use the following naming conventions 
when referring to the diﬀerent models mentioned. “Non-neural ”m o d - 
els are those that are not convolutional neural networks (i.e. the CNN 
developed by Kim (2014) ) or language models (i.e. BERT and XLNet). 
The multilayer perceptron (MLP) is technically a neural network, but 
it is categorized as “non-neural ”s i n c e it shares the same input repre- 
sentation as the other non-neural models, including averaged word em- 
beddings (discussed below). We refer to the CNN and language model 
classiﬁers as the “neural ”models. 
3.2.2. Tweet tokenization for non-neural models and CNN 
The ﬁrst and fundamental step in preprocessing the tweets to be us- 
able by machine learning models is to tokenize their text ( Neogi et al., 
2021 ). To do this, we ﬁrst applied a tweet preprocessing script 
( Wu, 2017 ) provided by the authors of the GloVe method of produc- 
ing word embeddings, discussed later in the Data Preprocessing sec- 
tion ( Pennington et al., 2014 ). This script makes the tweet lowercase 
and replaces URLs, numbers, hashtags, user handles (e.g., @johndoe), 
and common facial expression emojis with special generic tokens rep- 
resenting each of these classes. Furthermore, if a letter repeats three or 
more times, then repetition is replaced with the single letter followed 
by an ‘ < elong > ’ symbol (i.e., “aaa ”is replaced with “a < elong > ”), and 
if a word is in all caps, then ‘ < allcaps > ’ symbol is inserted after the 
lowercase word; for example, “HELLO ”w o u l d be replaced with “hello 
< allcaps > ”. 
After the above preprocessing, we use the NLTK natural language 
processing package’s TweetTokenizer class ( NLTK 2014 ) to convert each 
tweet into a list of tokens. Since these tokens are eventually substituted 
with their respective GloVe word embeddings, the ﬁnal preprocessing 
step is to make sure each token is converted into one of the tokens in 
the vocabulary on which GloVe was trained. To achieve this, we looped 
through the tokens in each tweet and did the following: (1) if a token 
was in the GloVe corpus, keep it unchanged, (2) if a token was a con- 
traction, break it up into 2 separate work tokens (e.g. “don’t ”becomes 
“do not ”), (3) if a token was not a contraction and still not in the corpus, 
use a Python implementation of the SymSpell word segmentation tool 
( Garbe, 2014 ; Mammothb, 2018 ) to see if spelling correction and/or the 
breaking up of run-on words (e.g. “helloworld ”becomes “hello world ”) 
produces tokens in the corpus, (4) if none of the above steps worked, re- 
place the token with a custom ‘ < UNK > ’ token, which is just the average 
of all the embedding vectors in the GloVe corpus. 
3.2.3. Word embeddings for non-neural models and CNN 
After tokenization, the next step in preprocessing is to take each to- 
kenized tweet and convert it to a numerical representation usable by 
machine learning models. One such representation is word embeddings, 
which represent each token (not just word tokens) as a vector capturing 
the semantic meaning of the token. The semantic relationships between 
tokens are geometrically encoded in the vectors such that tokens with 
similar meanings have embeddings vectors with a high cosine similarity. 
The main beneﬁt of using word embeddings is that they allow models 
5 


--- PAGE 6 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
to generalize well to new inputs ( Bengio et al., 2003 ). This is because, 
if a model receives a text input with tokens not seen at train time and 
if those new tokens have similar meanings to seen tokens, their embed- 
dings will look similar to those of the previously-seen tokens, allowing 
the model to generalize eﬀectively. 
In this paper, we used 200-dimensional GloVe embeddings (where 
200-dimensional embeddings were experimentally determined to work 
the best) trained on a corpus of two billion tweets ( Pennington et al., 
2014 ). The tweet corpus not only included tokens for words, but also 
for punctuation, hashtags, user handles, and common text emojis (e.g. 
“:) ”and “: ˆ) ”). The way in which word embeddings are used to feature 
the tokenized tweets depends on the kind of model being trained. The 
CNN model by Kim (2014) takes a matrix of word embeddings as an 
input, where each row represents a token in the tweet and the columns 
represent the diﬀerent dimensions of each embedding. Since the CNN 
takes a ﬁxed-length input and 93% of our dataset has fewer than 30 
tokens, we truncated tweets with more than 30 tokens and padded each 
tweet with fewer than 30 tokens with zero vectors (since GloVe does not 
provide a dedicated ‘ < pad > ’ token). The non-convolutional models (e.g. 
decision tree and SVM, discussed below) do not operate on embeddings 
matrices, so we averaged the embeddings of all the tokens in a tweet to 
produce a ﬁxed-length 200-dimensional vector. 
3.2.4. Preprocessing for language models 
The large language models BERT ( Devlin et al., 2018 ) and XLNet 
(Yang et al., 2019) use more sophisticated methods of tokenization. 
These models are trained on vocabularies of word pieces, including both 
whole words and segments (as small as individual letters). Text is then 
tokenized greedily with respect to the word piece corpus. In this pro- 
cess, the next token generated is the longest one matching the current 
text. For example, the next token generated for “the dog ”would be the 
word “the, ”not the letter “t ”. The advantage of using a word piece cor- 
pus is that every text can be tokenized into tokens that are present in 
the corpus, since single letters are a part of the corpus. This obviates the 
need for an unknown token as we used when tokenizing for GloVe. 
3.3. Data analysis 
3.3.1. Machine-Learning models 
We compare the performance of a diverse set of machine-learning 
models on the relevance and urgency classiﬁcation tasks. The non-neural 
models we use are the naive Bayes classiﬁer ( Rish, 2001 ), AdaBoost 
( Freund & Shapire, 1997 ), support vector machine (SVM) ( Cortes & 
Vapnik, 1995 ), multilayer perceptron (MLP) ( Pal & Mitra, 1992 ), logis- 
tic regression, and ridge regression ( Tikhonov, 1943 ). These non-neural 
models were selected from a larger set of diverse models based on their 
performance on a small manually-labeled trial dataset prior to crowd- 
sourced labeling via Amazon MTurk (discussed above). 
The CNN we use is the one developed by Kim (2014) , which takes 
n x k matrix as input, where the n rows correspond to the n tokens in a 
tweet, and k refers to the dimensionality of the GloVe word embeddings. 
In our study, n = 30 and k = 200. The single convolutional layer of the 
CNN uses the spatial relationships between the words to better produce 
features used by its downstream layers for the classiﬁcation task. 
There has been a recent trend in natural language processing in 
which large language models are pretrained on a very large corpus and 
are ﬁne-tuned for downstream tasks like classiﬁcation and translation, 
rather than just extracting their embedding layer as feature represen- 
tations to be used in separate models, as done with models like GloVe 
( Devlin et al., 2018 ). The reason for this paradigm shift is that ﬁne- 
tuning an entire model rather than just borrowing its embeddings allows 
all the information about the language encoded in the model architec- 
ture to be leveraged by the downstream task, resulting in signiﬁcantly 
better performance. 
We use two such models to build text classiﬁers, namely BERT 
( Devlin et al., 2018 ) and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019). BERT is a model 
inspired by the Transformer architecture proposed by Vaswani et al. 
(2017) . It was pretrained on the Masked Language Model (MLM), and 
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) tasks over a corpus of 3.3 billion words. 
XLNet is similarly inspired by the Transformer, but it is pretrained on a 
diﬀerent task-namely the Permutation Language Model (PML) objective 
over a dataset that is even larger than the one BERT is trained on. The 
BERT and XLNet models come in diﬀerent sizes (i.e. with a diﬀerent 
number of Transformer layers), but the versions we used both have 12 
Transformer layers, plus a couple layers on top to adapt the pretrained 
models for text classiﬁcation. 
3.3.2. Oversampling 
One drawback of the dataset used in the urgency classiﬁcation task 
is that urgent tweets are quite infrequent, which would allow models to 
achieve high accuracy by naively classifying every tweet as not urgent. 
One method of forcing models to avoid this pathological behavior is to 
generate new urgent examples using the small number present in the 
dataset. The simplest version of this is random oversampling, in which 
urgent tweets are randomly duplicated until they make up some larger 
percentage of the dataset (in this study we experiment with 33% and 
50%). One shortcoming of this approach is that since only existing data 
points are repeatedly added to the ﬁnal training set, models trained on 
such a dataset are highly prone to overﬁtting ( Chawla et al., 2002 ). 
We attempted to alleviate this problem by also trying out more 
sophisticated oversampling methods when training non-neural mod- 
els, speciﬁcally SMOTE, SVM-SMOTE, Borderline SMOTE, and ADASYN 
( Chawla et al., 2002 ; Han et al., 2005 ; He et al., 2008 ; Nguyen et al., 
2009 ). Surprisingly, every model we tested achieved the best perfor- 
mance using 50% naive oversampling (i.e., duplicating urgent tweets 
until they make up 50% of the dataset), so we only report the results for 
models trained with 50% naive oversampling. 
3.3.3. Model selection 
One of the biggest challenges in developing a machine learning 
model is the vast number of models available to choose from, as well 
as the numerous hyperparameters to tune in each model. We used the 
Scikit-learn machine learning package ( Pedregosa et al., 2011 ) to per- 
form 5-fold cross-validation (see the Training and Evaluation section) 
with numerous common non-neural classiﬁcation models and recorded 
their average accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 across the 5 folds with 
respect to relevance. The suite of classiﬁers that we used includes K- 
nearest neighbors, decision tree, ensemble methods (AdaBoost, ran- 
dom forests, extremely randomized trees), XGBoost ( Chen et al., 2015 ), 
support vector machine, Gaussian Naive Bayes, and Multilayer percep- 
tron. Of these models, AdaBoost, multilayer perceptron, Gaussian Naive 
Bayes, logistic regression, ridge regression, and the SVM had signiﬁ- 
cantly higher F1 scores than the other classiﬁers, so we decided to nar- 
row the scope of our study to those models. 
4. Results 
This section describes the performance of both the non-neural and 
neural models on both the relevance and urgency classiﬁcation tasks. 
The results reported for each task are the performance of the models 
trained on the train set and evaluated on the test set, after their hyperpa- 
rameters are ﬁrst tuned on the train set via gridsearch and 5-fold cross- 
validation. The ﬁnal hyperparameters for each model are described in 
the Appendix. 
4.1. Evaluation and robustness checks 
4.1.1. Evaluation metrics 
When assessing the performance of machine learning models, only 
recording accuracy presents an incomplete picture. For example, if a 
rare disease only occurs in 0.01% of the population, a naive detection 
system that predicts “not sick ”for everyone is 99.9% accurate, but it is 
6 


--- PAGE 7 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
undesirable because it misses the people who are sick; in other words, 
the system exhibits high precision but suﬀers from very poor recall. We 
thus evaluate our models using metrics that quantify both accuracy and 
how well the model captures truly positive examples. 
The metrics we use are accuracy, precision, recall, F1, and area under 
the receiving operator characteristic curve (AUC). We use F1 because it 
captures the tradeoﬀ between precision (how often a tweet is actually 
relevant or urgent if a model classiﬁes it as such) and recall (the frac- 
tion of truly relevant or urgent tweets that a model correctly classiﬁes as 
such). We also include the AUC metric because it shows how well a clas- 
siﬁer performs over all possible decision thresholds, where the decision 
threshold is a number used along with a model’s output to determine 
the ﬁnal classiﬁcation output. 
Although a good model scores well in all ﬁve metrics, we prioritize 
F1 since it is an intermediate metric that takes into account both pre- 
cision and recall. For a ﬁxed F1 score, we prioritize recall since from 
the perspective of a ﬁrst responder, it is preferable to sift through some 
false positive tweets rather than entirely miss many tweets from people 
who truly do need help. While F1 is the main metric by which we com- 
pare model performance, we still include the other metrics so that our 
models can be better compared to related work and future work has a 
wider variety of options to compare against our models’ performance. 
4.1.2. Training and evaluation 
A very important consideration when evaluating the performance 
of machine learning models is that their performance on the training 
dataset is often much better than that on a test set. Known as overﬁtting, 
this occurs because models have a tendency to learn spurious patterns 
and anomalies in the training set to achieve high training performance, 
while not learning enough of the general patterns required to perform 
well on unseen data. To alleviate the eﬀects of overﬁtting on model 
evaluation results, we split our dataset into a training set and a test 
set. We make the split such that both sets contain the same fraction of 
either relevant or urgent tweets. For this reason, we created a separate 
train-test pair for relevance and urgency. 
To tune the hyperparameters for each model, we performed grid- 
search over all combinations of hyperparameters that we considered. 
For each combination, we evaluated the model on the training dataset 
using stratiﬁed k-fold cross-validation, which works by randomly par- 
titioning the dataset into k subsets (such that each subset has the same 
fraction of positive (i.e. urgent or relevant) data points, and it included 
training the model on the other k -1 subsets and measuring the metrics 
on the single chosen test subset). This procedure is done k times by se- 
lecting each of the subsets as the test set, and the k values for each metric 
are averaged. Cross-validation is a good way to measure generalization 
performance since for each of the k splits, the model is evaluated only 
on the data subset not seen by the model during training. Furthermore, 
since each metric is calculated as an average over many test partitions 
of the data, cross-validation reduces the likelihood of a model “getting 
lucky ”with a particularly favorable train-test split. 
Each model’s hyperparameters are thus chosen to be the combination 
that maximizes cross-validated F1. To evaluate the model’s generaliza- 
tion performance, we trained the model on the entire training dataset 
and evaluated it on the test dataset, which has no role in the hyperpa- 
rameter selection process. We report results on a test set not involved 
in cross-validation since the mere act of searching over many combina- 
tions of parameters, while evaluating on a particular dataset, could lead 
to the selection of a hyperparameter combination overﬁt to that dataset. 
4.1.3. Relevance classiﬁcation 
Table 1 displays the results of the non-neural relevance classiﬁers 
explored in this study. The SVM achieved the highest F1 score, indicat- 
ing that it strikes the best balance between precision and recall of all 
the non-neural classiﬁers. 
Table 2 displays the analogous results for the neural classiﬁers. The 
BERT and XLNet language model achieve signiﬁcantly higher F1 scores 
Table 1 
Results of non-neural models trained on average word embeddings for the 
relevance classiﬁcation task. 
Models Accuracy Precision Recall F1 AUC 
Naive Bayes 0.64 0.61 0.77 0.68 0.64 
AdaBoost 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.66 
SVM 0.72 0.71 0.75 0.73 0.72 
MLP 0.70 0.69 0.73 0.70 0.70 
Logistic Regression 0.70 0.71 0.70 0.70 0.70 
Ridge Classiﬁer 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.71 0.71 
Table 2 
Results of neural models trained for the relevance classiﬁcation task. 
Models Accuracy Precision Recall F1 AUC 
CNN 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 
BERT 0.78 0.78 0.79 0.78 0.78 
XLNet 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 
Table 3 
Results of non-neural models trained on average word embeddings, with 
50% naive oversampling, for the urgency classiﬁcation task. 
Models Accuracy Precision Recall F1 AUC 
Naive Bayes 0.71 0.37 0.66 0.47 0.69 
AdaBoost 0.77 0.42 0.38 0.40 0.62 
SVM 0.71 0.35 0.51 0.42 0.64 
MLP 0.72 0.34 0.45 0.39 0.62 
Logistic Regression 0.74 0.38 0.53 0.45 0.66 
Ridge Classiﬁer 0.68 0.32 0.53 0.40 0.62 
than all the other neural and non-neural classiﬁers, with BERT narrowly 
achieving ﬁrst place with a score of 0.78. This is likely due to the fact 
that BERT and XLNet are language models pretrained on a very large 
corpus and then ﬁne-tuned in their entirety on the relevance classiﬁca- 
tion task. This is starkly diﬀerent from the other models, whose only 
prior information about the English language comes from the word em- 
beddings used to represent the tweets. The fact that BERT and XLNet 
encode signiﬁcant prior knowledge in their entire architectures is likely 
why they achieve such strong results despite the small size of our tweet 
dataset. 
4.1.4. Urgency classiﬁcation 
As mentioned in the Methods section, only results for urgency clas- 
siﬁers that are provided include those for 50% naive oversampling. 
The results without oversampling are not reported since they exhibit 
the pathological behavior in which the classiﬁers naively classify most 
tweets as “not urgent ”to achieve high accuracy at the expense of recall. 
As Table 3 indicates, among the non-neural classiﬁers, the naive 
Bayes classiﬁer achieves the highest F1 score with a signiﬁcantly larger 
recall than any other non-neural classiﬁer, with only the logistic regres- 
sion model coming in close second. The remarkably good performance 
of the naive Bayes classiﬁer compared to the other non-neural classiﬁers 
is likely due to the fact that the naive Bayes model makes predictions 
based on conditional probabilities directly observed in the dataset as 
opposed to indirectly learning patterns in the data by tuning parame- 
ters, making the naive Bayes model perform relatively better on smaller 
datasets. 
Table 4 clearly indicates that all three non-neural classiﬁers achieved 
signiﬁcantly higher F1 scores than any of the non-neural models, with 
the worst-performing of the three, the CNN, still achieving a F1 score 
0.07 higher than that achieved by the naive Bayes model. The CNN likely 
achieved better results since its input format indicates the embedding 
of each token in the tweet in order, allowing the convolutional layer to 
use spatial relationships between words to make classiﬁcation decisions. 
Both language models achieved even higher scores than the CNN, likely 
7 


--- PAGE 8 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
Table 4 
Results of neural models trained with 50% naive oversampling for the ur- 
gency classiﬁcation task. 
Models Accuracy Precision Recall F1 AUC 
CNN 0.93 0.57 0.53 0.54 0.53 
BERT 0.76 0.66 0.70 0.67 0.70 
XLNet 0.77 0.67 0.71 0.68 0.71 
Table 5 
Results of our language model performance compared to performance of 
models in the literature. 
Model F1 Score 
BERT - R 0.78 
XLNet - R 0.77 
BERT - U 0.67 
XLNet - U 0.68 
CNN + LSTM - KUM 0.77 
CNN - BUR 0.84 
SVM - BUR 0.83 
SVM - YAN 0.69 
Logistic Regression - ASH 0.65 
due to the fact that their extensive pretraining allowed them to leverage 
prior knowledge of the English language to learn to detect urgent tweets 
from a small dataset. 
4.1.5. Comparing performance of models 
To better frame our study in the context of the existing research on 
disaster tweet classiﬁcation, we compare our best results (i.e. perfor- 
mance of the language models) to those achieved by a few related stud- 
ies addressing similar classiﬁcation problems. The studies we compare 
against are Ashktorab et al. (2014) , who trained logistic regression mod- 
els on unigrams to classify tweets from a small custom dataset as con- 
taining mentions of human or infrastructure damage; Burel et al. (2018) , 
who used SVMs, decision trees, and CNNs to build relevance classiﬁers 
on the CrisisLexT26 dataset; Yang et al. (2017) , who built SVM classi- 
ﬁers to determine whether tweets sent during Hurricane Harvey con- 
tained requests for rescue or not; and Kumar et al. (2020) , who used 
both text and image data from tweets sent during Hurricane Harvey to 
classify them as informative or not. 
Table 5 displays the F1 scores achieved by a couple of the models 
trained in each of the related work, as well as our own BERT and XL- 
Net relevance and urgency classiﬁers. Each model in the table is listed 
followed by a hyphen and an abbreviation of the corresponding study. 
Kumar et al.’s (2020) model’s results refer to the F1 score achieved on a 
Hurricane Harvey dataset when the multi-modal model (with a major- 
ity voting procedure) was trained on a dataset of tweets from Hurricane 
Maria. The abbreviations we use, along with the corresponding classi- 
ﬁcation task, are as follows. (Our own models are not followed by any 
abbreviation, but an R for “relevance ”and a U for “urgency ”is used): 
• Ashktorab et al. (2014) : (ASH) - whether tweet mentions casualties 
or infrastructural damage 
• Burel et al. (2018) : (BUR) - whether tweet is related to a crisis or not 
• Yang et al. (2017) : (YAN) - whether a tweet sent during Hurricane 
Harvey contains a request for rescue 
• Kumar et al. (2020) : (KUM) - whether tweet sent during Hurricane 
Harvey is informative or not 
5. Discussion 
By examining ‘calls for help’ on Twitter through machine learning 
methods, we ﬁrst identiﬁed how Twitter is used during disasters like 
Hurricane Harvey. Furthermore, we built both non-neural and neural 
machine-learning models, taking a variety of embeddings-based feature 
representations of tweets, to classify tweets related to Hurricane Harvey 
as relevant,urgent, or not. 
5.1. Comparison to previous literature 
To make sense of our results, it is important to compare them to pre- 
vious research with similar classiﬁcation tasks. Our results displayed in 
Table 5 indicate that our relevance classiﬁers do better than the mod- 
els built by Yang et al. (2017) and Ashktorab et al. (2014) , and they 
perform similarly to the model by Kumar at al. (2020) . However, the 
classiﬁers created by Burel et al. (2018) do markedly better. One rea- 
son for this disparity with Burel et al.’s models could be the sizes of 
the datasets on which the models are trained and tested. Our relevance 
dataset (train and test) collectively contains about 4000 tweets, whereas 
the CrisisLexT26 dataset used by Burel et al. contains around 28,000 
tweets. 
Furthermore, Burel et al.’s (2018) classiﬁcation task is simpler in 
that models merely determine whether a tweet is about a disaster or 
not, whereas our more nuanced task requires classiﬁers to determine 
whether tweets satisfy very speciﬁc criteria, such as containing requests 
for help (excluding charity donations) or reactions to the eﬀorts of vol- 
unteers and ﬁrst responders. 
Our urgency classiﬁers do not achieve the same level of performance 
as the relevancy classiﬁers, but this likely has to do with the rarity of 
urgent requests for help in our dataset, which then motivated us to re- 
duce the size of the urgency dataset and employ oversampling. Based 
on the strong performance of our language model classiﬁers on the rel- 
evance dataset, we would expect the urgency performance to improve 
with more data. 
5.2. Contributions to literature 
This study makes several contributions to the ﬁeld of disaster tweet 
classiﬁcation and crisis communication in disasters. While Twitter has 
been found to be an instrumental communication tool during disasters 
to share news and information, document experiences, and connect with 
others, an important ﬁnding is that Twitter has been used to request and 
coordinate lifesaving rescue eﬀorts ( David et al., 2016 ; Devaraj et al., 
2020 ; Rhodan, 2017 ; Robertson, Johnson, Murthy, Smith, & Stephens, 
2019 ; Yang et al., 2017 ). This study examines a particular instance of 
this phenomenon, namely calls for help during Hurricane Harvey, and 
presents machine learning models that classify tweets related to the dis- 
aster as relevant or irrelevant and urgent or not urgent. 
Another important contribution is that we demonstrate that aver- 
aged word embeddings are a feasible way to produce ﬁxed-length fea- 
tures on which non-neural models (like SVMs and logistic regression 
models) can be trained. Furthermore, to our knowledge, our work is the 
ﬁrst to use modern language models like BERT and XLNet in the dis- 
aster tweet classiﬁcation domain and demonstrate that they are by far 
the best-performing among the variety of non-neural and neural models 
that we explored. Our promising results thus open the door to future 
work in which the wealth of large-scale modern language models that 
have been developed in the past couple years, like RoBERTa, BART, and 
GPT-2, can be harnessed to produce state-of-the-art results in disaster 
tweet classiﬁcation ( Lewis et al., 2019 ; Liu et al., 2019 ; Radford et al., 
2019 ). Given that pretrained large language models often perform well 
on downstream tasks with limited or even no training data ( Brown et al., 
2020 ; Devlin et al., 2018 ; Radford et al., 2019 ), it would be fruitful for 
future work to explore the ability for these models to generalize to new 
disasters with very little to no training data. 
5.3. Implications for practice 
Our work has the potential to improve emergency response eﬀorts 
signiﬁcantly by providing an automated framework capable of sifting 
8 


--- PAGE 9 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
through large-scale and noisy Twitter data to identify information rel- 
evant to ﬁrst responders. First, our relevance classiﬁcation model can 
directly provide emergency response relevant tweets to help coordinate 
their rescue eﬀorts. Second, our proposed data preprocessing strate- 
gies such as word embeddings and tokenization help improve the in- 
terpretability of the dataset from the perspective of the machine learn- 
ing model. Third, we provide a framework for deﬁning relevance on 
a spectrum (from least to most urgent), providing even greater insight 
to emergency response on how to best coordinate their eﬀorts. Lastly, 
our large-scale evaluation and comparison with state-of-the-art mod- 
els demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our model in providing relevant tweets, 
while at the same time minimizing the false negatives that may occur 
from noise in the dataset. Our demonstration that pretrained large lan- 
guage models can achieve reasonable performance on the classiﬁcation 
task with limited training data indicates the potential to custom-develop 
such models for new disasters in a timely manner. We believe the tech- 
niques in our work can be generalized to datasets in the future that deal 
with other types of natural disaster and emergency response situations 
outside of ﬂooding. 
6. Limitations and future directions 
One potential avenue of improvement in our work would be the size 
and comprehensiveness of the dataset, which only included 4000 coded 
tweets posted during Hurricane Harvey to train relevance and urgency 
classiﬁers. Our neural models (CNN and language models), which al- 
ready performed markedly better than the non-neural ones, would likely 
have beneﬁted from a larger dataset as deep learning models generally 
perform better with more data. This is especially true of the urgency 
dataset, which only consisted of 1160 tweets due to the rarity of urgent 
tweets in the dataset of 4000 tweets. Thus, an intuitive future improve- 
ment of our project would be to signiﬁcantly increase the size of our 
dataset such that our models would have enough urgent training exam- 
ples to achieve F1 scores comparable to those achieved by the relevance 
classiﬁers in our study. 
Another avenue of improvement regarding our dataset would be 
to collect similar relevancy and urgency datasets from other disas- 
ters, including disasters similar to and diﬀerent from Hurricane Har- 
vey. This expanded dataset could then be used to gage how well a 
model trained on one disaster generalizes to diﬀerent disasters, since 
a model capable of detecting relevant and urgent tweets in novel situa- 
tions would be of great use to ﬁrst responders, as it would obviate the 
need to collect and manually label a new dataset for every new disas- 
ter. The concept of training machine-learning models that generalize to 
new domains is known as domain adaptation, and Ganin et al. (2015) , 
Glorot et al. (2011) , and Hoﬀman et al. (2018) describe methods of 
domain adaptation that could be tried on the models evaluated in this 
study. 
Finally, our classiﬁers could be potentially more useful to ﬁrst re- 
sponder operations if trained in a multi-class setting. In this study, we 
limited ourselves to the simpler binary classiﬁcation case for the sake of 
identifying which types of machine learning models are generally best 
suited to the classiﬁcation of disaster tweets. Future work could tune the 
most promising models we identiﬁed to create classiﬁers that signal to 
ﬁrst responders not only which tweets are relevant or urgent, but what 
speciﬁc category they correspond to. 
7. Conclusion 
Because Twitter is so readily available in comparison to traditional 
emergency phone services, it is often used as a way to request help and 
connect with others during large-scale disasters. Using recorded data 
from Hurricane Harvey, a highly signiﬁcant and recent natural disas- 
ter in the United States, this study aims to help detect posts on Twitter 
that are relevant to ﬁrst responders-requests for help, reports of damage, 
and reactions to other ﬁrst responders’ eﬀorts. Using a variety of neu- 
ral and non-neural machine learning models trained on 4000 unique 
coded tweets related to Hurricane Harvey, this study developed rele- 
vance classiﬁers from large-scale language models which detected rel- 
evant tweets at a rate competitive with existing classiﬁers. Although 
the classiﬁers did not achieve F1 scores competitive with those devel- 
oped by Burel et al. (2018) , we believe that some contributing factors 
to this could be their signiﬁcantly larger dataset and simpler classiﬁca- 
tion task of discerning whether tweets are relevant to a disaster at all, 
rather than those tweets satisfying speciﬁc conditions of importance to 
ﬁrst responders, as our task required. The urgency classiﬁers we trained 
on the same dataset did not achieve recall or F1 scores competitive with 
the related work and thus have room for improvement, which we be- 
lieve would be possible with a larger dataset of urgent tweets. To our 
knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to present the use of large pretrained 
language models like BERT and XLNet to built disaster tweet classiﬁers, 
and their superior performance compared to the non-neural models and 
CNN suggests that they are a viable option for future work seeking to 
achieve state-of-the-art results in disaster tweet classiﬁcation. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
University of North Texas Libraries Hurricane Harvey 
Dataset (2017–08–18/2017–09–22) from https://digital.library. 
unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc993940/digital.library.unt.edu 
( Phillips, M. E. 2017 ) 
Appendix. : Tables & Figures 
Optimal hyperparameters 
The following are the optimal hyperparameters discovered for each 
model using 5-fold cross-validation on the training relevance and ur- 
gency datasets. For the non-neural models, the parameter names are 
those used in version 0.21.1 of the Scikit-learn documentation. Each ta- 
ble corresponds to a single model, and each row corresponds to either 
the relevance or urgency classiﬁcation task. Models that have no tables 
did not have any signiﬁcant hyperparameters to tune. 
The following is an explanation of the hyperparameters used in the 
CNN model architecture, since it is not implemented in the Scikit-learn 
library: 
• dropout : The probability that one of the input nodes to the dropout 
layer is zeroed out 
• n_ﬁlters : The number of convolutional ﬁlters of each size used 
• ﬁlter_sizes : The set of ﬁlter widths used, with n_ﬁlters number of 
each ﬁlter size in the architecture 
For example, if n_ﬁlters = 100 and ﬁlter_sizes = [1,2], then the CNN 
has 200 ﬁlters in total, with 100 having a width of 1 word and 100 
having a width of 2 words. Tables A1 , A2 , A3 , A4 , A5 , A6 , A7 
Table A1 
Optimal Hyperparameters for the CNN. 
Experiment dropout n_ﬁlters ﬁlter_sizes epochs batch_size 
Relevance 0.3 100 1, 1 10 8 
Urgency 0.3 100 1, 1 50 8 
9 


--- PAGE 10 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
Table A2 
Optimal hyperparameters for AdaBoost. 
Experiment learning_rate n_estimators 
Relevance 1.0 50 
Urgency 1.0 100 
Table A3 
Optimal hyperparameters for SVM. 
Experiment C gamma kernel 
Relevance 10 0.1 rbf 
Urgency 10 0.1 linear 
Table A4 
Optimal hyperparameters for MLP. 
Experiment activation alpha early_stopping 
Relevance relu 0.01 False 
Urgency tanh 0.001 False 
Table A5 
Optimal hyperparameters for ridge classiﬁer. 
Experiment alpha 
Relevance 1.0 
Urgency 0.1 
Table A6 
Optimal hyperparameters for BERT. 
Experiment learning rate epochs batch size 
Relevancy 3e-5 20 8 
Urgency 3e-5 10 16 
Table A7 
Optimal hyperpameters for XLNet. 
Experiment learning rate epochs batch size 
Relevancy 3e-5 5 4 
Urgency 3e-5 5 4 
References 
Ahn, J., Son, H., & Chung, A. D. (2021). Understanding public engagement on 
Twitter using topic modeling: The 2019 Ridgecrest earthquake case. Interna- 
tional Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 1 (2), Article 100033. 
10.1016/j.jjimei.2021.100033 . 
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. (2017). Big data and disaster management: A systematic review 
and agenda for future research. Annals of Operations Research, 283 (1–2), 939–959. 
10.1007/s10479-017-2584-2 . 
Appling, S., Briscoe, E., Ediger, D., Poovey, J., & McColl, R. (2014). Deriving disaster-re- 
lated information from social media. In Proceedings of the 1st KDD Workshop on Learn- 
ing about Emergencies from Social Information (pp. 16–22). KDD (KDD-LESI) . 
Ashktorab, Z., Brown, C., Nandi, M., & Culotta, A. (2014, May). Tweedr: Mining Twitter 
to inform disaster response. In ISCRAM. (pp. 269–272). 
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., & Jauvin, C. (2003). A neural probabilistic language 
model. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3 , 1137–1155 . 
Berardelli, J. (2019). How climate change is making hurricanes more danger- 
ous. Yale Climate Connections. https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2019/ 
07/how-climate-change-is-making-hurricanes-more-dangerous/ 
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., et al., (2020). 
Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys- 
tems, 33 , 1877–1901 . 
Burel, G., & Alani, H. (2018). Crisis event extraction service (CREES): Automatic detection 
and classiﬁcation of crisis-related . Content on Social Media . 
Blake, E. S., & Zelinsky, D. A.. National hurricane center tropical cyclone report: Hurricane 
Harvey . https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092017_Harvey.pdf . 
Carter, L. (2018, July 31). Timeline: Hurricane Harvey brings catastrophic rain, ﬂood- 
ing to Gulf Coast. Retrieved from https://www.khou.com/article/news/timeline- 
hurricane-harvey-brings-catastrophic-rain-ﬂooding-to-gulf-coast/285-579150393 
Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Syn- 
thetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 16 , 
321–357 . 
Chen, T., He, T., Benesty, M., Khotilovich, V., & Tang, Y. (2015). Xgboost: Extreme gradi- 
ent boosting. R Package Version 0.4-2 , 1-4. 
Cortes, C., & Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Machine Learning, 20 (3), 
273–297 . 
David, C. C., Ong, J. C., & Legara, E. F. T. (2016). Tweeting Supertyphoon Haiyan: Evolv- 
ing functions of Twitter during and after a disaster event. PloS one, 11 (3), Article 
e0150190 . 
Derczynski, L., Meesters, K., Bontcheva, K., & Maynard, D. (2018). Helping crisis respon- 
ders ﬁnd the informative needle in the tweet haystack. ArXiv preprint 
Devaraj, A., Murthy, D., & Dontula, A. (2020). Machine-learning methods for identifying 
social media-based requests for urgent help during hurricanes. International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 51 , Article 101757. 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101757 . 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi- 
rectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint 
Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. E. (1997). A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learn- 
ing and an application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55 (1), 
119–139 . 
Gallagher, J. J.. 01). Hurricane Harvey wreaks historic devastation: By the numbers . 
https://abcnews.go.com/US/hurricane-harvey-wreaks-historic-devastation-numbers/ 
story?id = 49529063 . 
Garbe, W. (2014, March 25). SymSpell (Version 6.3) [Computer software]. Retrieved April 
15, 2019, from https://github.com/wolfgarbe/SymSpell 
Ganin, Y., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., Germain, P., Larochelle, H., Laviolette, F., . . . Lempit- 
sky, V. (2016). Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. The Journal of Machine 
Learning Research, 17 (1) 2096–2030 . 
Glass, T. A. (2001). Understanding public response to disasters. Public Health Reports, 116 , 
69 . 
Glorot, X., Bordes, A., & Bengio, Y. (2011). Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment 
classiﬁcation: A deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the ICML . 
Guo, J., Liu, N., Wu, Y., & Zhang, C. (2021). Why do citizens participate on government 
social media accounts during crises? A civic voluntarism perspective. Information & 
Management, 58 (1), 103286. 10.1016/j.im.2020.103286 . 
Han, H., Wang, W. Y., & Mao, B. H. (2005). Borderline-SMOTE: A new over-sampling 
method in imbalanced data sets learning. In Proceedings of the international conference 
on intelligent computing (pp. 878–887). Springer . 
He, H., Bai, Y., Garcia, E. A., & Li, S. (2008). ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic sampling ap- 
proach for imbalanced learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE international joint conference 
on neural networks (pp. 1322–1328). IEEE. (IEEE World Congress on Computational In- 
telligence) . 
Hoﬀman, J., Tzeng, E., Park, T., Zhu, J. Y., Isola, P., Saenko, K., . . . Darrell, T. (2018). 
Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain adaptation. In International Conference 
on Machine Learning (pp. 1989–1998) . 
Imran, M., Mitra, P., & Castillo, C. (2016). Twitter as a lifeline: Human-annotated twitter 
corpora for NLP of crisis-related messages. arXiv preprint 
Imran, M., Castillo, C., Lucas, J., Meier, P., & Rogstadius, J. (2014, May). Coordinating 
human and machine intelligence to classify microblog communications in crises. In 
ISCRAM. 
Imran, M., Elbassuoni, S., Castillo, C., Diaz, F., & Meier, P. (2013, May). Extracting infor- 
mation nuggets from disaster-Related messages in social media. In ISCRAM . 
Ives, M., & Yoon, J. (2022, September 29). Ian strains emergency services in 
Southwest Florida. New York Times. Retrieved October 12, 2022, from 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/29/us/hurricane-ian-emergency-services- 
southwest-ﬂorida.html 
Jorgensen, D. (2017). 911 centers overwhelmed during disasters August 28. Keloland Media 
Group https://www.keloland.com/news/911-centers-overwhelmed-during-disasters/ . 
Khanday, A. M. U. D., Rabani, S. T., Khan, Q. R., & Malik, S. H. (2022). Detecting twitter 
hate speech in COVID-19 era using machine learning and ensemble learning tech- 
niques. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 2 (2), 100120. 
10.1016/j.jjimei.2022.100120 . 
Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation. ArXiv preprint 
Kim, J., & Hastak, M. (2018). Social network analysis: Characteristics of online social 
networks after a disaster. International Journal of Information Management, 38 (1), 86–
96. 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.08.003 . 
Knutson, T. R., Sirutis, J. J., Zhao, M., Tuleya, R. E., Bender, M., Vecchi, G. A., et al., 
(2015). Global projections of intense tropical cyclone activity for the late twenty-ﬁrst 
century from dynamical downscaling of CMIP5/RCP4. 5 scenarios. Journal of Climate, 
28 (18), 7203–7224. 10.1175/JCLI-D-15-0129.1 . 
Kumar, A., Singh, J., Dwivedi, Y., & Rana, N. (2020). A deep multi-modal neural network 
for informative Twitter content classiﬁcation during emergencies. Annals of Operations 
Research , 1–32. 10.1007/s10479-020-03514-x . 
Kumar, S., Kar, A. K., & Ilavarasan, P. V. (2021). Applications of text mining in services 
management: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Information Man- 
agement Data Insights, 1 (1), 100008. 10.1016/j.jjimei.2021.100008 . 
Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O. et al. (2019). 
Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, 
translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint 
Li, H., Guevara, N., Herndon, N., Caragea, D., Neppalli, K., Caragea, C. et al. (2015, May). 
Twitter mining for disaster response: A domain adaptation approach. In ISCRAM. 
10 


--- PAGE 11 ---
C.J. Powers, A. Devaraj, K. Ashqeen et al. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 3 (2023) 100164 
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D. et al. (2019). Roberta: A robustly 
optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint 
Lindsay, B.R. (2011). Social media and disasters: Current uses, future options, and policy 
considerations. CRS Report for Congress. 
Little, G., Chilton, L. B., Goldman, M., & Miller, R. C. (2009). Turkit: Tools for iterative 
tasks on Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD workshop on human com- 
putation (pp. 29–30). ACM . 
Mammothb. (2018, August 13). SymSpell (Version 6.3) [Computer software]. https:// 
github.com/mammothb/symspellpy 
Morales, X.Y.Z.G. (2010). Networks to the rescue: Tweeting relief and aid during typhoon 
ondoy (Thesis, Georgetown University). 
Morstatter, F., Lubold, N., Pon-Barry, H., Pfeﬀer, J., & Liu, H. (2014). Finding eyewitness 
tweets during crises. arXiv preprint 
Murthy, D. (2018). Twitter: Social communication in the twitter age . Cambridge: Polity Press . 
Neogi, A. S., Garg, K. A., Mishra, R. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2021). Sentiment 
analysis and classiﬁcation of Indian farmers’ protest using Twitter data. Inter- 
national Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 1 (2), Article 100019. 
10.1016/j.jjimei.2021.100019 . 
Murthy, D., & Longwell, S. (2013). Twitter and disasters: The uses of Twitter during 
the 2010 Pakistan ﬂoods. Information Communication & Society, 16(6), 837–855. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2012.696123 . 
Nguyen, D.T., Joty, S., Imran, M., Sajjad, H., & Mitra, P. (2016). Applications of online 
deep learning for crisis response using social media information. arXiv preprint 
Nguyen, H. M., Cooper, E. W., & Kamei, K. (2009). Borderline over-sampling for imbal- 
anced data classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the ﬁfth international workshop on computa- 
tional intelligence & applications (pp. 24–29). IEEE SMC Hiroshima Chapter. Vol. 2009, 
No. 1 . 
NOAA. (2018, January 26). Costliest U.S. tropical cyclones tables updated. Retrieved from 
https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/news/UpdatedCostliest.pdf 
Olteanu, A., Castillo, C., Diaz, F., & Vieweg, S. (2014). Crisislex: A lexicon for collecting 
and ﬁltering microblogged communications in crises. In Proceedings of the 8th interna- 
tional AAAI conference on weblogs and social media (ICWSM’14) (No. CONF) . 
O’Neal, A., Rodgers, B., Segler, J., Murthy, D., Lakuduva, N., Johnson, M., et al., (2018). 
Training an Emergency-Response Image Classiﬁer on Signal Data. In Proceedings of 
the 17th IEEE international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) 
(pp. 751–756). IEEE . 
Ovadia, S. (2009). Exploring the potential of Twitter as a research tool. Behavioral & Social 
Sciences Librarian, 28 (4), 202–205 . 
NLTK. (2014). Accessing text corpora and lexical resources. Retrieved from 
https://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html 
Pal, S.K., & Mitra, S. (1992). Multilayer perceptron, fuzzy sets, classiﬁcation. 
Palen, L., & Hughes, A. L. (2010). Social media in disaster communication. In Handbook 
of disaster research –2nd edition (pp. 497–520). Cham, Switzerland: Springer . 
Paul, A. (2015). Identifying relevant information for emergency ser- 
vices from twitter in response to natural disaster. Retrieved from 
https://eprints.qut.edu.au/89220/1/Avijit_Paul_Thesis.pdf 
Peary, B. D., Shaw, R., & Takeuchi, Y. (2012). Utilization of social media in the east Japan 
earthquake and tsunami and its eﬀectiveness. Journal of Natural Disaster Science, 34 (1), 
3–18. 10.2328/jnds.34.3 . 
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., et al., 
(2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
12 (Oct), 2825–2830 . 
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. (2014). Glove: Global vectors for word repre- 
sentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language 
processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1532–1543) . 
Pew Research Center (2018, March 1). Social media use in 2018 . Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2018/03/01/social-media-use-in-2018/ 
Phillips, M.E. (2017). Hurricane Harvey Twitter dataset, dataset, 2017-08-18/2017-09- 
22; ( https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc993940 /: Accessed January 
29, 2018), University of North Texas Libraries, Digital Library, digital.library.unt.edu 
Prasad, R., Udeme, A. U., Misra, S., & Bisallah, H. (2023). Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation 
of transportation disaster tweets using improved bidirectional encoder representations 
from transformers. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 3 (1), 
100154. 10.1016/j.jjimei.2023.100154 . 
Rachunok, B., Fan, C., Lee, R., Nateghi, R., & Mostafavi, N. (2022). Is the data suit- 
able? The comparison of keyword versus location ﬁlters in crisis informatics us- 
ing Twitter data. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 
2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2022.100063 . 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Language 
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8), 9. 
Rathore, A. K., Kar, A. K., & Ilavarasan, P. V. (2017). Social media analytics: Litera- 
ture review and directions for future research. Decision Analysis, 14 (4), 229–249. 
10.1287/deca.2017.0355 . 
Rhodan, M. (2017). Please send help: Hurricane harvey victims turn to twit- 
ter and facebook. Time . http://time.com/4921961/hurricane-harvey-twitter- 
facebook-social-media/ . 
Rish, I. (2001). An empirical study of the naive Bayes classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the IJCAI 
2001 workshop on empirical methods in artiﬁcial intelligence : 3 (pp. 41–46) . 
Robertson, B. W., Johnson, M., Murthy, D., Smith, W. R., & Stephens, K. K. (2019). Using 
a combination of human insights and ‘deep learning’ for real-time disaster communi- 
cation. Progress in Disaster Science, 2 , 100030. 10.1016/j.pdisas.2019.100030 . 
Smith, W. R., Stephens, K. K., Robertson, B. W., Li, J., & Murthy, D. (2018). Social media 
in citizen-led disaster response: Rescuer roles, coordination challenges, and untapped 
potential. In Proceedings of the 15th international ISCRAM conference (pp. 639–648) . 
Spence, P. R., Lachlan, K. A., Lin, X., & del Greco, M. (2015). Variability in Twitter con- 
tent across the stages of a natural disaster: Implications for crisis communication. 
Communication Quarterly, 63 , 171–186. 10.1080/01463373.2015.1012219 . 
Stephens, K. K., Li, J., Robertson, B. W., Smith, W. R., & Murthy, D. (2018). Citizens com- 
municating health information: Urging others in their community to seek help during 
a ﬂood. In K. Boersma, & B. Tomaszewski (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th international 
ISCRAM conference May 2018 . 
Tikhonov, A.N. (1943). On the stability of inverse problems. In Doklady Akademii nauk 
SSSR (Vol. 39, pp. 195–198). 
Stephens, K. K., Robertson, B. W., & Murthy, D. (2019). Throw me a lifeline: 
Articulating mobile social network dispersion and the social construction of 
risk in rescue communication. Mobile Media & Communication, 8 (2), 149–169. 
10.1177/2050157919846522 . 
Tim, Y., Pan, S. L., Ractham, P., & Kaewkitipong, L. (2017). Digitally enabled disaster 
response: The emergence of social media as boundary objects in a ﬂooding disaster. 
Information Systems Journal, 27 (2), 197–232. 10.1111/isj.12114 . 
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., . . . Polo- 
sukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems , 30 . 
Wadud, M. A. H., Kabir, M. M., Mridha, M. F., Ali, M. A., Hamid, M. A., & 
Monowar, M. M. (2022). How can we manage oﬀensive text in social media-a text 
classiﬁcation approach using LSTM-BOOST. International Journal of Information Man- 
agement Data Insights, 2 (2), 100095. 10.1016/j.jjimei.2022.100095 . 
Wu, M. (2017, February 20). Preprocess-twitter.py [Computer software]. 
https://gist.github.com/tokestermw/cb87a97113da12acb388 
Yang, Z., Nguyen, L. H., Stuve, J., Cao, G., & Jin, F. (2017). Harvey ﬂooding rescue in 
social media. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on big data (Big Data) 
(pp. 2177–2185). IEEE . 
Zou, L., Lam, N. S. N., Shams, S., Cai, H., Meyer, M. A., Yang, S., et al., (2019). Social and 
geographical disparities in Twitter use during hurricane Harvey. International Journal 
of Digital Earth, 12 (11), 1300–1318. 10.1080/17538947.2018.1545878 . 
11 