

--- PAGE 1 ---
77
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs
Using Artificial Intelligence: A Survey
RABINDRA LAMSAL, AARON HARWOOD, and MARIA RODRIGUEZ READ,
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Australia
The rise of social media platforms provides an unbounded, infinitely rich source of aggregate knowledge of
theworldaroundus,bothhistoricandreal-time,fromahumanperspective.Thegreatestchallengewefaceis
howtoprocessandunderstandthisrawandunstructureddata,gobeyondindividualobservationsandseethe
“big picture”—the domain of Situation Awareness. We provide an extensive survey of Artificial Intelligence
research, focusing on microblog social media data with applications to Situation Awareness, that gives the
seminal work and state-of-the-art approaches across six thematic areas:Crime, Disasters, Finance, Physical
Environment, Politics,a n dHealth and Population. We provide a novel, unified methodological perspective,
identify key results and challenges, and present ongoing research directions.
CCS Concepts: •Information systems→Data stream mining;Data analytics;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Social media, Twitter analytics, short text processing, machine learning,
deep learning, applied statistics, social computing
ACM Reference format:
Rabindra Lamsal, Aaron Harwood, and Maria Rodriguez Read. 2022. Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness
fromMicroblogsUsingArtificialIntelligence:ASurvey. ACMComput.Surv. 55,4,Article77(November2022),
38 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524498
1 INTRODUCTION
Being able to understand the state of the world around us—referred to assituation awareness—
is a fundamental capability for making effective decisions affecting our future. The role of “Social
Media,”sometimesattributedtoas“Web2.0,”isattheforefrontofthisendeavortoday.Socialmedia
referstothoseinternetandmobile-basedservicesthatfacilitateonlineexchangesofconversations,
social networking, and forming online communities for contributing user-created content among
their users [41]. Arguably, the vast uptake of social media platforms has revolutionized the way
people interact socially with each other. These platforms allow individuals, organizations, and
governments to interact with a large number of people, all in real-time, through the exchange of
texts, photos, videos, and social network cues such as liking and following.
This study was supported by the Melbourne Research Scholarship from the University of Melbourne, Australia.
Authors’ address: R. Lamsal, A. Harwood, and M. R. Read, School of Computing and Information Systems, University
of Melbourne, Melbourne Connect, 700 Swanston Street, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3010; emails: rlamsal@student.
unimelb.edu.au, {aharwood, maria.read}@unimelb.edu.au.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions frompermissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2022/11-ART77 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524498
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 2 ---
77:2 R. Lamsal et al.
The billions of active social media users per month [132] provide a big data processing chal-
lenge that is infeasible without employing high-performance, large-scale distributed computa-
tionalmethods—witharapidlyincreasingdemandfor machinelearning [21]approaches. Machine
Learning(ML) isasubsetof ArtificialIntelligence (AI)thatprimarilyfocusesonmakingasys-
temlearnandimproveitselfwithoutinvolvingexplicitprogramming,byutilizingconceptsprimar-
ily from statistics, probability, linear algebra, and differential calculus. ML shares its application
scopewithmanyinter-disciplinaryareas,includingmedical[ 76],linguistics[ 92],timeseriesfore-
casting [8], and computer vision [141]. The various learning paradigms associated with ML are
discussed later in Section2.
1.1 Situation Awareness from Social Media
Speed, transparency, and ubiquity, aided by the proliferation of mobile technology, are the main
reasons for the growth of social media. For example, situations that would have otherwise re-
mainedrelativelyunknownforanindefiniteperiodarenowbeingreportedandsharedworldwide
within minutes [94]. It literally takes only a few seconds to report a situation globally on social
media:takeaphoto,writeafewwords,andshareitonline.Thisreportingmethodismoreefficient
than individual cellular communication (e.g., making individual calls to friends and family), since
socialmediaeffectivelyprovidesapublicbroadcastplatformforindividuals.Effectiveinclusionof
informationdrawnfromsocialmediahasbecomeanecessityforgovernmentauthoritiestobetter
understand the environment and people that they govern. The online interaction between users
withtheexchangeofstatusupdates,newsstories,andothermediahaspotentialtobesignificantly
advantageous forsituation awareness.
As defined in Reference [42], situation awareness is a three-stage process:Perception, Compre-
hension,and Projection.Inthe Perceptionstage,informationregardinganeventiscollectedandun-
wantedinformationisfilteredout.The Comprehensionstage involvesintegratingmultiplepiecesof
informationcollectedfromtheearlierstageandstudyingitsrelevanceandvalidity.Thelaststage
ofsituationawarenessisthe Projectionstage,andithasbeenfoundthatevenexperiencedindividu-
alsrelyonfutureprojectionsheavilywhiledealingwithsituations.Projectingthecurrentscenarios
and dynamics to their future implications gives space for timely and effective decision-making.
A situation is traditionally perceived using observations, questionnaires, interviews, checklists,
andmeasurements[ 42].Socialmediaconversationsintheformoftext,photos,andvideosoverlap
the observation, questionnaire, and interview methods of collecting data. Previous studies have
shown that such socially generated data contributes to a better understanding of an ongoing situ-
ation [62]. For example, during a disastrous event people tend to use social media excessively, as
theysharetheirsafetystatusandexchangeconversationstoquerythesafetystatusoftheirfriends
and family. People also share what they have seen, felt, or heard from others. During such critical
hours of a disaster, the use of social media can peak to unprecedented levels, and based on these
public conversations first responders and decision-makers can visualize a more comprehensive
real-time picture of the situation to aid in formulating actionable plans.
1.2 The Social Media Spectrum
Figure 1 classifies some of the popular [132] social media services.Social Network Servicesare
platforms that allow users to create profiles and develop a network of connections so their ex-
changed conversations are shared effectively within the network. Instant Messaging Services are
a subclass of Social Network Services, considering their main feature of creating users’ networks.
Online Journals, commonly referred to as “blogs,” let their users publish stories/ideas usually in
a reverse chronological order.Social Bookmarking Servicesallow users to bookmark links to web-
sites.Theseservicescangenerateenormoustraffictothebookmarkedwebcontent. Microblogsare
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:3
Fig. 1. Classification of some popular [ 132] social media services. Notes: +in millions, unless mentioned
otherwise (as of January 2021);∗R represents restricted usage (restricted to a limited set of publishers); N/A
represents not available; A represents available;∗∗Places API for accessing global point of interest (POI) data.
online broadcasting services that allow users to post updates with a limited number of words or
characters. Wikis are collaborative platforms powered by wiki engines where their users can edit
andmanagethecontent.Unlikecontentmanagement systemsuchasWordPress,thecontentpro-
duction in a wiki is not limited to a sole author.Media-sharing Servicesallow their users to share
media contents such as images and videos. This classification does not have strict boundaries, be-
cause one way or another, these services borrow features from the other side of the spectrum to
keeptheirusersengaged.ConsiderTwitter—itisamicrobloggingplatform,butitalsoactsasaSo-
cial Network and also allows sharing of images and short videos just like Media-Sharing Services.
1.2.1 SuitabilityforSituationAwareness. Tobeaneffectivesourceofsocialmediaforenhancing
situation awareness, we consider three key attributes (shown in Figure1): The content should
carry real-time descriptions, there should be a significantly large and active userbase, and the
service must provide a public streaming API. With these criteria in mind, we focused this survey
on Microblog services, primarily research that uses Twitter data. Some social media services may
nothavereal-timeattributes,i.e.,theircontentisupdatedoveralongtimeintervals,buttheystill
contribute to enhancing situation awareness by enriching the data obtained from their real-time
peers. Consider, for example, an event associated with theEiffel Tower; during the processing of
socialmediaconversations,aparallelanalysisfromwikiscanhelpMLmodelsunderstandthatthe
event is closely associated withFrance,Paris,a structure,a monument, and so on.
1.3 Scope and Organization
There are existing surveys related to social media analytics concerning its techniques, tools, plat-
forms [16], and applications—disasters [62, 98], visual analytics [156], politics [133], health [1],
business [57], false information and rumor detection [80,176]. Based on our literature search, the
previous surveys either focus on social media in general and/or are application/analysis-specific.
To the best of our knowledge, this survey is the first that studies the use of AI for extracting sit-
uation awareness from microblogs without limitations on both the application and analysis. As
major contributions of this survey, we:
—discusstheessentialaspectsofmicrobloganalyticsandpresentahigh-levelmethodological
view of the literature (in Section2),
—survey AI research that extract situational information from microblog data (in Section3),
—provide a commentative review of the literature and present challenges and research direc-
tions in the domain (in Section4).
2 BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARY CONCEPTS
In this section, we discuss high-level aspects of microblog analytics that are common across the
surveyedliterature.Westartwithareviewofdifferingtasks,associatedalgorithms/methods,some
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 4 ---
77:4 R. Lamsal et al.
advancedMLmethods,andlaterprovideabroaddescriptionofcommonlyusedmicroblogdataand
its uses, followed by basic and advanced methods for representation learning. We refrain fromen
massecitationstotheliteratureinthissection;adetailedliteraturebreakdownisgiveninSection 3.
2.1 Fundamental Machine Learning
Manyoftheapplications/problemsdescribedinthesurveyedliteraturewereaddressedusingfun-
damental applications of machine learning and/or applied statistics.
2.1.1 Supervised Learning Problems. In this set of problems, the task is to learn a function
that maps an input to output based on previously recorded examples [21]; therefore, requir-
ing labelled data for training purposes. Considering a set ofN previously recorded examples,
{(x1,y1 ),..., (xn ,yn )}, such thatxi represents the feature vector of theith example andyi repre-
sents the corresponding output class, a supervised learning problem aims at modelling a function
f : X →Y,w h e r eX represents the input space andY represents the output space. Supervised
learning problems are further divided into two types:Regression (continuous output) andClas-
sification (discrete output or categories). The literature employs different variants of regression-
basedalgorithmssuchasLinear/PolynomialRegression,StepwiseRegression,PoissonRegression
[17,34,86,149],andclassification-basedalgorithmssuchas LogisticRegression(LR) [14,32,46],
Naive Bayes (NB) [37, 51, 100, 117, 121, 143], K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [2], Decision
Trees (DT)[37, 121], Random Forest (RF)[10, 90, 117, 136], Support Vector Machine (SVM)
[37, 100, 117, 121], andArtificial Neural Network (ANN)(refer to Section4.2 for recent trends
in the use of neural models).
2.1.2 UnsupervisedLearningProblems. Thissetofproblemsdealswiththetaskoflearninginter-
nalpatternsfromunlabelleddata[ 21]:clustering—findinggroupsofsimilarexamples; densityesti-
mation—determiningthedistributionofdata; visualization—projectinghigh-dimensionaldatatoa
two-orthree-dimensionalspace; outlierdetection—detectinganomalies; topicmodelling —learning
latent variables; and understanding opinions from texts using lexicon-based methods (some liter-
ature classify lexicon-based methods as semi-supervised, as these methods maintain a predefined
dictionaryofwordsandphrases).Commonlyusedmethodsinunsupervisedlearningare K-Means
[88], Hierarchical Clustering, Isolation Forest,Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)[3, 46, 149],
KernelDensityEstimation(KDE) [32,46],PrincipalComponentAnalysis(PCA) ,andANN.
Thereisathirdlearningparadigm,aninstanceof weaksupervision [174],knownas Semi-supervised
learning, where a small set of labelled data is used alongside a large set of unlabelled data during
training.Oneofitscasesis Activelearning (discussedshortlyinSection 2.2.2),whichaimsattrain-
ing models during situations when labelled data may not be available promptly.
2.1.3 Applied Statistical Problems. Besides the learning problems discussed above, some sur-
veyedliteratureusescomputationallyintensiveappliedstatisticalmethods.Examplesincludeclas-
sicaltimeseriesforecastingmethods[ 4,45](e.g., auto-regressive(AR) models,movingaverage
(MA) models, and their variants) for forecasting the future using historical data, Markov models
[15] for modelling systems with pseudo-random characteristics, resampling methods for estimat-
ing the precision of statistics, generalized additive models [39, 148] for modelling interpretable
predictor functions, the Granger causality test for causality analysis [23, 172] in multiple time
series data.
2.2 Advanced Machine Learning
Ofthesurveyedliterature,themorerecentworkstendtoutilizeanensembleoftechniquesforfo-
cusingfundamentallyonthe“learning”perspectivetodealwithlarge-scaledata,discussedbelow.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:5
2.2.1 Representation Learning. Also known asfeature learning, representation learning [18]
allows a system to automatically learn meaningful and useful representations of data. This set
of techniques replaces traditional manual feature engineering, thus enabling systems to learn
featuresbythemselvesandtrainforspecifictasks.ExamplesincludeANN,SparseCoding,Indepen-
dent Component Analysis, and Clustering methods.Deep learning[85] is a representation learn-
ing method based on ANN, used for both supervised and unsupervised tasks, where each layer in
thenetworklearnstotransformtheinputdataintoamoreabstractandcompositerepresentation.
Nowadays, deep learning architectures are the go-to methods for dealing with large-scale data,
as these architectures often capture sophisticated non-linear relationships and outperform their
traditional counterparts in numerous tasks further in. Deep learning architectures such asMul-
tilayer Perceptron (MLP), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),a n dRecurrent Neural
Network (RNN)are supervised models. Architectures such asSelf-Organizing Maps (SOMs),
Boltzmann Machines, and AutoEncoders are unsupervised models.
2.2.2 Active Learning. In Active learning [123], a case of semi-supervised learning, a learning
algorithm (learner) interactively queries a human to label sampled examples. Since the learner it-
self determines the examples for labelling, the number of labelled data needed in active learning
is often less than the number required in normal supervisedlearning. The learner uses probabilis-
tic methods for uncertainty sampling of examples from the unlabelled dataset. The uncertainty
sampling approach includes strategies such as least confidence, margin sampling, and entropy
sampling.OthermethodsincludeQuery-by-Committee,ExpectedErrorReduction,andWeighted
Methods.
2.2.3 Few-shotLearning. InFew-shotlearning(FSL) [151]thetrainingsetcontainsalimited
number of labelled examples. FSL is mainly applied to supervised tasks such as image classifica-
tion, text classification, and object recognition. There is another instance of FSL—Few-shot rein-
forcement learning—that aims to find a policy given only a few state-action pairs. The literature
classifies FSL tasks into three categories:Data-based, where training data is augmented by prior
knowledge;Model-based,wherethehypothesisspaceislimitedbypriorknowledge;and Algorithm-
based, where search methods in the hypothesis space are altered by prior knowledge.
2.2.4 Transfer Learning. In Transfer learning (TL)[175] knowledge is transferred across re-
lated source domains. Data labelling in the case of microblogs can be time-consuming, expensive,
or unrealistic during events such as disasters and riots. Semi-supervised learning does utilize a
smallchunkoflabelleddataalongsidealargeunlabelledsetforimprovinglearningaccuracy.How-
ever,obtainingunlabelleddataitselfcanbedifficultinmanycases.Duringsuchascenario,TLhas
been reported to show promising results. In TL, a base network is trained for a base task using a
dataset,andthenthelearnedfeaturesaretransferredtoadifferentnetworkfortrainingonatarget
datasetconcerningatargettask[ 163].TLworksifthefeaturesaregenerictobothbaseandtarget
tasks. Some examples of TL include the Inception model [134] and ResNet model [54] for image
data, and Word2vec [97] and GloVe [105] for text data.
2.3 Microblog Data
The most common surveyed uses of microblog data are shown in Figure2 as a taxonomy ofmi-
croblog data objects-specific tasks. From the literature, we have identified five main categories of
microblogdata: Dataobjects includefundamentalattributessuchastextcontent,contentcreation
time, content identifier, a resharing flag, and so on;User objects include details that reference
a user’s profile, for example, user ID, user biography, location, followers/following list, and so
on; Geo objects, available when content is geo-tagged, include attributes related to geographic
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 6 ---
77:6 R. Lamsal et al.
Fig. 2. Taxonomy of microblog data objects-specific tasks.
information,suchasprecisegeo-coordinates,boundingboxcoordinates,andplacetype; Entityob-
jectsprovideadditionalcontextualinformationregardingthecontent,forexamplehashtags,URLs,
usermentions,media,andsoon;and Miscellaneousobjects containdiverseattributes,includingin-
teraction metrics, machine-identified language of the content and service specific data.
2.4 Word Vectorization
Word vector representation methods found in the literature are broadly eitherFrequency-based,
where the components of the vectors associate to the frequency attribute of words and word se-
quences, orPrediction-based, where the vectors are trained weights of a neural network.
2.4.1 Frequency-based. (a) Bag of words.In the Bag of words(BoW)model, each document
(text object) is represented by a vector of dimension|V| whereV is the vocabulary, and theith
componentofthevectorrepresentsthefrequencyofthecorresponding ithwordinthedocument.
(b) Bag ofn-grams. In this model, the vocabulary consists ofn-grams, wheren represents the
sizeofthecontinuoussequence.The n-gramofsize2isa bigramandsize3isa trigram.TheBo W
model is a special case wheren = 1, i.e., aunigram. (c) Term Frequency-Inverse Document
Frequency(TF-IDF). TheTF-IDFmodelusesthe“importanceofawordtoadocument”factorfor
computing the vector representation of the document. The TF-IDF value, defined as the product
of TF (w,d ) = frequencyd (w ) and IDF (w,D) = ln |D|
1+|dϵD:wϵd|, increases proportionally to the
frequency of a wordw in a documentd and is penalized based on the number of documents in
the corpusD containing the wordw. Frequency-based methods introduce high dimensionality
and sparsity issues due to vocabulary size. Furthermore, they fail to capture the true semantics of
words and do not deal without-of-vocabulary (OOV)words.
2.4.2 Prediction-based. (a) Static Embeddings. In 2013, Mikolov et al. [ 97]p r o p o s e d
Word2vec, a neural network-based text representation model that learns word vectors of a given
dimensionwhilemaintainingsemanticsimilaritybetweenthewords,thussolvingthedimensional-
ity,sparsity,andcontextissuesassociatedwithfrequency-basedmethods. GloVe[105]isasimilar
technique,butexploitsbothglobalstatisticsandlocalstatisticsofatextcorpus,whereasWord2vec
usesonlythelocalstatistics.BothWord2vecandGloVeconsiderwordsasthesmallestunitstotrain
on.ThisresultsinaninabilitytodealwithOOVwords.In2016,Facebookproposed FastText[22]
to address the OOV words issue by representing each word as a bag of charactern-grams. These
modelsgeneratestaticembeddings(vectors)i.e.,thesameembeddingisassignedtothesamewords
used across different contexts.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:7
(b) Contextual (Dynamic) Embeddings.Recent progress inNatural Language Process-
ing (NLP)has led to the design of contextualized embedding models that address the issue of
polysemous. Some widely used such models include seq2seqNMT (Neural machine transla-
tion) model-based Contextualized Word Vectors(CoVe)[ 95]; two-layer bidirectional LSTM-
based Embeddings from Language Models(ELMo)[106]; ASGD Weight-Dropped LSTM-based
UniversalLanguageModelFine-tuning (ULMFiT)[58];andTransformer-based[ 138]Bidirec-
tionalEncoderRepresentationsfromTransformers (BERT)[40]and GenerativePre-trained
Transformer-3(GPT-3)[109].
2.5 Image Representation
Inrecentyears,numerousmethodshavebeenproposedforlearningimagerepresentations.Some
methodstovisualfeaturelearningincludelearningthroughimagecolorization,imageinpainting,
imagesuper-resolution,imagegenerationwith GenerativeAdversarialNetworks(GANs) [50]
andgameengines,contextsimilarityandspatialrelationsbetweenimagepatches,shufflingofim-
agepatches,imageclustering,andTL[ 68].In2020,Chenetal.[ 31]proposed SimCLR,asimplified
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations, that outperforms the existing state-
of-the-artmethod[ 55]forself-supervisedandsemi-supervisedlearning,andperformsonparwith
or better than the supervised baseline method [77].
2.6 Graph Representation
Based on the encoder-decoder framework proposed by Hamilton et al. [52], and depending on
thetypeofinformationusedintheencodernetwork,graphsrepresentationlearningmethodsare
majorly classified into four classes:shallow embeddings,graph auto-encoders,graph-based regular-
ization,a n dgraph neural networks[29]. Shallow embeddings, auto-encoders, and graph neural
networksareunsupervisedembeddingmethodsthatmapagraphontoavectorspacewiththeob-
jective of learning an embedding that preserves the graph structure. Graph-based regularization
is a supervised graph embedding method; shallow embeddings and graph neural networks also
have their use in supervised settings. The supervised methods, however, besides learning the rep-
resentations,also predictnode or graph labels that could be valuable particularlyfor downstream
supervised tasks such as node or graph classification.
Mining of microblog data objects introduces various social networks of unprecedented scales:
networksoffriends,hashtags,keywords,followers,bots,geographiclocations,andsoon.Theliter-
ature represents a social network as agraph—a nonlinear data structure consisting of entities and
theirrelationships.Normally,anetworkisagraph G (V ,E),where V denotesvertexes(entities)and
E denotes edges (relationships), and it is represented mathematically using matrices such asInci-
denceMatrix,(Weighted) AdjacencyMatrix,DegreeMatrix,LaplacianMatrix [24].Socialnetworks
are a means to study the behavior of entities such as people, organizations, and events; for exam-
ple, a network analysis of users’ pool is modeled by distinguishing the individuals as nodes and
theirrelationshipsasedges.Graphmininghasapplicationtosocialnetworkanalysisacrossmulti-
ple tasks [135], including:Centrality analysis, identifying the most influential nodes in a network;
Community detection, identifying communities/groups through public discourse and/or interac-
tionpatterns; Informationdiffusion,studyinghowinformationpropagates/flowsinanetwork;and
Outlier detection—identifying rare entities and/or relationships.
2.7 Evaluation Metrics
There is no consistent use of evaluation metrics across the surveyed literature and this makes it
hard to numerically compare different studies.R-squared (R2), Mean Absolute Error (MAE),
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Relative Absolute Error (RAE),a n dRoot Relative
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 8 ---
77:8 R. Lamsal et al.
Squared Error (RRSE)are some common evaluation metrics for regression problems. Consider
aproblemwhere a1,..., an representsactualvaluesand p1,..., pn representspredictedtargetval-
ues. Letϵ= ∑(ai−pi )2 and the notationx≡1
n
∑xi. Then the evaluation metrics are defined:R2
is 1− ϵ∑(ai−p )2 ; MAE is 1
n
∑|pi −ai|; RMSE is
√
ϵ
n; RAE is
∑|pi−ai|∑|ai−a| ;a n dRRSE is
√
ϵ∑(ai−a)2 . Some
studies use Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC),r =
∑(xi −x )(yi −y)/
√∑(xi −x )2 ∑(yi −y)2 wheren is
samplesize,and xi,yi aredatapoints,tofindameasureoffitforlinearregression,andtimeseries
problems.
Accuracy, Precision, Recall (a.k.a. sensitivity), Specificity, F-measure,a n dArea under the ROC
Curve (AUC) are the commonly used evaluation metrics for classification problems.True Posi-
tive(TP),TrueNegative(TN),FalsePositive(FP) ,and FalseNegative(FN) aremeasuresused
forcomputingthosemetrics.TPrepresentsthenumberofsamplespredictedpositiveandthatare
actually positive. TN represents the number of samples predicted negative and that are actually
negative. FP represents the number of samples predicted positive but that are actually negative.
FN represents the number of samples predicted negative but that are actually positive. Accuracy
is the number of correct predictions to the total number of samples,TP +TN
TP +TN +FP +FN . Accuracy is
not applicable if the dataset is imbalanced (unequal distribution of samples between classes). Pre-
cision gives the percentage of positive samples out of the total predicted positive samples and is
computedas TP
TP +FP .Recallgivesthepercentageofpositivesamplesoutofthetotalactualpositive
samples and is computed as TP
TP +FN . Specificity gives the percentage of negative samples out of
the total actual negative samples and is computed asTN
TN +FP . F-measure is the harmonic mean of
precision and recall and is computed asFβ= (1+β2 )×precision ×recall
(β2×precision )+recall . The AUC is a plot ofSensitiv-
ityversus1-Specificityacrossvaryingthresholdvalues.The ReceiverOperatingCharacteristics
(ROC)curveisaprobabilitycurve.AmodelwithagoodmeasureofseparabilityhasanAUCscore
near 1.
Common evaluation metrics for clustering areSilhouette Coefficient(SC) and Dunn’s Index
(DI). SC is computed ass = b−a
max (a,b ),w h e r ea is the average distance between a sample and all
otherdatapointsinthesamecluster,and bisthedistancebetweenasampleandallotherdatapoints
inthenextnearestcluster.Thedistancemetriccanbeanydistancefunction,suchasEuclideanor
Manhattan. DI is the ratio of the minimum inter-cluster distance to the maximum cluster size.
2.8 A High-level Methodological View of the Literature
To better understand how the surveyed literature relates to the common problem of enhancing
situation awareness from microblog data, we present a high-level methodological view of the lit-
erature, shown in Figure3, that embodies the microblog data objects and range of techniques
discussed above, and we provide theme-specific methodological examples in Section3.
2.8.1 The Perception Stage. This stage involves the collection of relevant data. The first step
to curating a large-scale microblog dataset starts with pre-determining a set of “seed”keywords
(words and phrases) andhashtags (keywords preceded by a hash sign). Next, asearch queryis
created. A search query contains keywords, hashtags, and conditions for requesting relevant data
from API endpoints. For example, a search query usingtwarc1 on Twitter’sfull-archive endpoint
c a nb ea ss i m p l ea s :“(covid OR quarantine OR lockdown OR pandemic OR #covid-19 OR #covid
OR mask OR ppe OR flu) -filter:nativeretweets lang:en” --archive --since-id 1372953264359145481 --
until-id 1407693866816393223. This query searches for original (not re-shared) English language
Twittercontentsthatinclude thequeriedkeywordsandhashtagswithintheirtext bodyandwere
1https://github.com/DocNow/twarc.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:9
Fig. 3. A high-level methodological view of the literature.
createdbetweenthetwotime-based“Snowflake”identifiers.Whenaconnectionisestablished,the
microblog API endpoint returns a continuous data stream—payload—based on the search query.
The payload is stored in a central database. Additional data such as discussions, headlines, and
reports from other sources can also be considered for enriching the existing corpora.
High-volume endpoints such as Twitter’sCOVID-19 stream endpointutilizes four partitions to
split the overall volume of payload over multiple connections to consume the entire stream. File-
based databases such asSQLite are equally effective for handling large-scale data, but they come
with demerits of their own compared to their distributed peers. Therefore, the selection of the
database is up to the user. Next, an on-demand dataset is created and labelled (if the problem is
supervised)eitherbyexpertsorthroughcrowdsourcing.Theresultingdataisfinallypre-processed
as per requirements.
2.8.2 The Comprehension Stage. This stage deals with data modelling and analyses and is
problem-specific(refertoSection 2.1)andrelatestotaskssuchasTextClassification,TextCluster-
ing, Image Classification, Sequence Labelling, and so on. Refer to Figure2 f o ral i s to fm i c r o b l o g
objects and their corresponding tasks.
2.8.3 The Projection Stage. This stage involves observing visualizations and summaries gener-
ated during the comprehension stage for projecting current scenarios to their future implications
and making decisions. Activities in this stage include: (i) observing abstractive summarization of
the data stream and quantitative assessments on maps/charts and (ii) analyzing real-time convex
closures (generated using geo-tagged content) of a situation.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 10 ---
77:10 R. Lamsal et al.
Fig. 4. The citation network. Yellow nodes represent papers in the survey, manually clustered into thematic
area, and black nodes represent papers that cite the surveyed papers. The 20 most cited papers are labelled.
Some nodes have irregularities due to limitations at the API end.
3 SURVEY OF AI APPROACHES FOR SITUATION A W ARENESS
Weundertookanextensivesearchinthedigitallibrariesof ACM,Elsevier,IEEE,Springer,andother
major publishers while also utilizing theWeb of Scienceand Scopus databases to identify relevant
papers published between 2010–21 (the early 2010s mark the emergence of microblog APIs2). We
discarded papers from the initial set if: (i) primary data source was not microblog, (ii) extracting
“situationalinformation”wasnottheprimaryobjective,(iii)AIwasnotemployedsignificantly,and
(iv) published before 2020 and had <5 citations.Crossref’s public API3 was used for querying the
list of papers that cited a set of 78 papers initially collected during the filtering stage of the paper
selectionprocess.Thisdatawasusedtocreateacitationnetwork,showninFigure 4,wherenodes
represent papers and are weighted based on the number of citations they receive from within the
network. Under the hypothesis that the most influential papers are likely to have many citations,
we manually identified 19 additional papers that were either foundational papers or significantly
related to the scope of this survey. Out of the surveyed papers, the nodes corresponding to the
most prominent papers in terms of citations are highlighted and labelled in the citation network.
Literature breakdown.We reviewed 97 papers out of which 28 were fromElsevier,1 5f r o m
IEEE,13from ACM,9from JMIR,6from Springer,and26(combined)fromjournalssuchas Taylor&
Francis,Wiley,SAGE,Emerald,andBMC.Outof97papers,thissurveyinvolved63journalpapers,
29 conference and symposium papers, 2 workshop papers, 2 book chapters, and 1 thesis article.
Amongthe20mostcitedpapers,15ofthemwerepublishedbefore2016.Outofthose,7arejournal
2https://blog.twitter.com/developer/en_us/a/2011/streaming-api-turning-ssl-only-september-29th .
3https://www.crossref.org/documentation/retrieve-metadata/rest-api/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:11
Table 1. Abbreviations Used in Tables 2–7
SmPar Semantic Parsing TpMd Topic
Modelling
SmEx Semantic Extraction
SpTmMd Spatio-temporal Modelling Cf Classification SeqLbl Sequence Labelling
Reg Regression SnAn Sentiment
Analysis
WoVec Word Vectors
DnEs Density Estimation AdSt Advanced
Statistics
CoFqAn Content Frequency
Analysis
LLVFE Low Level Visual Features
Extraction
NetAn Network
Analysis
NER Name Entity
Recognition
papers, 6 are conference papers, 1 is a book chapter, and 1 is a workshop paper. The remaining 5
out of the 20 most cited papers published after 2015 are all journal articles.
Thematic areas.The papers identified for the survey are classified into six thematic areas:
Crime, Disasters, Finance, Physical Environment, Politics, and Health and Population. Each the-
maticareaisfurtherdividedintosub-thematicareasbasedonresearchdirections.Tables 2–7pro-
vide an overview of the essential elements of the literature in each thematic area, and we use
abbreviations throughout, as shown in Table1.
3.1 Crime
This thematic area surveys microblog data as a “social crime sensor” that helps detect geograph-
ical regions that are more likely to show criminal conduct. Such analysis can assist agencies and
governments in producing persistent solutions to counter crimes such as theft, burglary, robbery,
cyberbullying, and harassment. Table2provides an overview of the literature in this theme.
3.1.1 Predicting Future Crime. A Generalized Linear Regression Model (GLM)was de-
signedbyWangetal.[ 149]forpredictingfuturehit-and-runincidents.TheauthorsusedLDAfor
topic modelling andSemantic Role Labeling (SRL)for extracting events, entities, and their re-
lationships from tweets. Their results showed that training an LDA/GLM model on event-specific
words has higher predictive capability than training the same model on a complete vocabulary.
Wang et al. [148] extended this work while incorporating spatio-temporal, geographic, and de-
mographic data. The extended work proposed a new modelling approach, theSpatio-Temporal
Generalized AdditiveModel(STGAM),thatusedafeature-basedapproachtopredicttheprob-
ability of criminal activities alongside their space and time attributes.
Gerber [46] collected geo-tagged Twitter data, used LDA for topic modelling and designed a
binary LR model using KDE + the features derived from the Twitter topics. In 19 of the 25 crime
types,theTwitterdata+KDEfeaturesimprovedthemodel’sperformancecomparedtousingjust
theKDEfeatures.Similarly,Chenetal.[ 32]consideredcrimedensity,thesentimentoftweets,the
last threedays’ sentiment trend, andweather factorssuch as temperature,dew, precipitation,and
so on, as explanatory variables for designing a model to predict future crimes. The authors used
KDEtocomputecrimedensityandlexicon-basedmethodsforsentimentanalysisandreportedthe
KDE + Twitter + weather data model surpassing the base model that used only KDE features.
B e n d l e re ta l .[17] used predictive analytics to show that Twitter data can assist in predicting
future crimes. The authors selected a small region within San Francisco with higher Twitter ac-
tivity, divided the area chosen into a 10× 10 grid, and performed regression analysis to provide
evidencefortherelationshipbetweenTwitterdataandcriminalactivities.TheytrainedSVMmod-
els to predict burglary and robbery crimes while including and excluding tweets’ volume feature.
The inclusion of volume feature for training showed improvement in prediction performance.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 12 ---
77:12 R. Lamsal et al.
Table 2. Overview of the Literature in “Crime” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Dataset Geo
Scope
Tasks Best outcome
Predicting
crimes
2012 [ 149] 3.65K tweets United
States
SmPar,TpMd Wide confidence
intervals
2012 [ 148]s a m e a s [149] United
States
SmPar,SpTmMd,
TpMd
AUC: 0.7616
2014 [ 17] 60K geo-tagged
tweets
United
States
Cf,Reg Accuracy: 0.66
2014 [ 46] 1.52K geo-tagged
tweets
United
States
DnEs,TpMd AUC: 0.71
2015 [ 32] 1.06M tweets United
States
Cf,DnEs,SnAn AUC: 0.67
2015 [ 145] 1.23M tweets, 224K
POI from
Foursquare
United
States
Cf,Reg Accuracy: 71%
2018 [ 140] 6-month period
tweets, 47K POI
from Foursquare
United
States
Reg 19% improvement over
baseline model
2020 [ 2] 150K tweets Global Cf Accuracy: 92.0%
Analyzing
crime
rates
2016 [ 5] 101M tweets United
States
Cf F-measure: 0.83
2018 [ 6] 1.13M tweets United
States
Cf,SnAn,TpMd F-measure: 0.94
2020 [ 139] 3.80K tweets India Clu Accuracy: 70%
Space-
time
Analysis
2019 [ 108] 26K tweets, 2.57K
tweets after
filtering
Mexico AdSt,Reg Absolute errors for
80% & 95% coverage:
3.796 & 2.933
2019 [ 130] 979K geo-tagged
tweets
Mexico
City
SnAn,WoVec F-measure: 0.80
2020 [ 115] 9.43K geo-tagged
tweets
Mexico
City
DeEs,SnAn AUC upper limit:
0.72–0.77
2021 [ 103] 123K tweets Mexico
City
Clu,SnAn,TpMd Statistical analysis
presented
Foursquare data has also been used in combination with Twitter data to study the correlation
between the predicted masses of people at different venues and the occurrence of real crimes at
those venues. Wang and Gerber [145] designed two text-enriched models, one for predicting the
typeofvenue(e.g.,restaurantortransportationhub)theuserislikelytovisitnextandanotherfor
predictingthespatialinformation.Theirmodels outperformedallbaselinemodels—threeMarkov
models and an SVM model—trained on historical visiting details. They reported that geo-tagged
tweets do correlate with users’ next venue visits.
Similarly, data from Foursquare and Twitter has been combined with taxi trip data to analyze
human activity patterns. Vomfell et al. [140] presented a multi-model solution using a Simultane-
ous Autoregressive Model, a Conditional Autoregressive Model, and a Generalized Linear Mixed
Modelassomeofthepredictorsfortheirspatiallinearregressionmodels.TheauthorstrainedRF,
Ensemble-based, and ANN models and reported that the heterogeneous data sources they consid-
eredcontributetoabetterpredictionofpropertycrimescomparedtousingjustdemographicdata.
Abbass et al. [2] developed ann-gram language model to predict cybercrimes using Twitter.
Theauthorscollectedtweetscontaininghashtagssuchas #harassment, #metoo, #sexualassualt,
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:13
#cyberbullying, #victim for training Multinomial NB, KNN, and SVM models to find the best
value ofn forthe n-grammodel. Theirresultsshowedthatthebigramlanguage modelperformed
better than the network-based feature selection approach, and SVM outperformed other models.
3.1.2 Analyzing Crime Rates. Relationships between Twitter data and crime rates have been
examined in multiple studies. Aghababaei and Makrehchi [5] trained a linear SVM model using
features extracted from historical Twitter data. Their model achieved anF-measure of 0.83 for
crimessuchastheft,burglary,andsexoffenses;however,theresultsforcrimessuchasmurderand
vandalism correlated poorly. The same work was later extended with a temporal topic model [6]
thatoutperformedthebatchmodelin17outof22crimetypes.Voetal.[ 139]analyzedTwitterdata
fromsevenmajorcitiesofIndiatoconfirmthattweetscontributetoabetterunderstandingofcrime
rates.TheauthorsusedtheTwitterpart-of-speechtagger 4 andaclass-based n-gramclustering[ 25]
to build a crime rate detection model that predicted nearly 70% of the crime rates.
3.1.3 Space-time Analysis. An exploratory study was done by Piña-García and Ramírez-
Ramírez [108] using Twitter data alongside Google Trends on 13 different crimes, including theft,
robbery,rape,andhomicide.TweetswerefilteredattheAPIlevelusingSpanishkeywordssuchas
‘‘inseguridad,’’ ‘‘violencia,’’ ‘‘robo,’’ ‘‘crimen,’’ and ‘‘víctima.’’ Their results
showedthepairwisecorrelationoftheofficialcrimedataandthetweetsasalmostnegligible.The
authors asserted that Twitter data should be considered merely observative and not representa-
tive. However, they acknowledged the effectiveness of Twitter data in understanding the spatio-
temporal patterns of crime data.
A crime analysis tool was developed by Siriaraya et al. [130] to provide contextual information
regarding crimes through visualization. The tool uses a binary linear SVM trained on GloVe for
identifying negative sentiment tweets to explore the negative characteristics of crime associated
areas. The tool visualizes situational information based on crime type and period. Tweets specific
toacrimeora regionareshownonaninteractivemap,andawordcloudisgeneratedtodescribe
the spatial and temporal aspects of the crime area.
Concerning sporting events, Ristea et al. [115] studied the spatial relationship between geo-
tagged tweets and crime occurrences alongside demographic and environmental aspects. The
authors used crowd-sourced databases related to “hate words” and “swearing” to extract tweets
containing at least one word from those databases. Feature selection was done using RF, and sen-
timent analysis was performed based on lexicon methods. They computed the density estimate
based on the center points of each grid and then trained an LR model. Their result showed im-
provedAUCinallcrimetypesduringeventdaysandnon-eventdayswiththeadditionofTwitter
data to the base model.
Similarly, Park et al. [103] examined the spatial distribution of sentiments and the level of hap-
piness using geo-tagged Twitter data, census data, and geospatial data on one of the shrinking
cities in the United States—Detroit. The authors collected username, text, geo-coordinates and
used theComplete Automation Probability (CAP)technique to filter out bot-involved tweets.
Cluster and hotspot analyses were performed to study the spatial distribution of sentiments, LDA
was implemented for topic modelling, and the AFINN lexicon dictionary5 was used for comput-
ing sentiments of tweets. Their results reported that areas with less crime tend to be happier and
suggested that areas with negative sentiments should be prioritized for regeneration efforts.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure5.
4http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ark/TweetNLP/.
5https://pypi.org/project/afinn/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 14 ---
77:14 R. Lamsal et al.
Fig. 5. A methodological view of the literature in “Crime” thematic area.
3.2 Disaster
Peopledisseminatesituationalinformationbefore,during,andafternatural/human-madedisasters
and hazards such as earthquakes, floods, cyclones, fires, terrorist attacks, and nuclear explosions.
Researchers have used such socially generated data for enhancement of situation awareness and
predictionandrapidassessmentofdisasterswithacommonpurposetofacilitatelawenforcement
agenciesandhumanitarianbodiestogetfirsthandknowledgeaboutanongoingsituation.Table 3
provides an overview of the literature in this theme.
3.2.1 Identifying Relevant Data. Imran et al. [65] applied a classification-extraction approach,
also presented in their previous work [64], for extracting informative tweets. The authors imple-
mented a sequence labelling algorithm to tokenize tweets to form a sequence of word tokens and
assignlabelsbasedonclassificationrequirements.Thestudyintendedtodetectinformativetweets
and distinguish those tweets as reported by direct eyewitnesses or simply the repetitive blocks of
earlier reported situations. The classification task was validated against tweets labelled by volun-
teers to show that their approach could extract 40%–80% of informative tweets.
A keyword relevance scoring approach was developed by Joseph et al. [69] for identifying and
ranking keywords that might assist in finding tweets that describe a situation. The authors used
reports generated on Ushahidi, a crowd-sourced platform, to identify keywords associated with
actions, entities, and location aspects of a disaster. The relevance of each keyword was computed
based on its frequency in Ushahidi reports and its use in other contexts besides disaster.
A real-time multi-level damage assessment model was proposed by Shan et al. [124]. In the
first level, dictionaries specific to physical damage and sentiments were constructed. LDA was
used on infrastructure, industry, people, and so on, related documents retrieved from the Baidu
searchengine.Inthesecondlevel,thesituation(what),time(when),andentity(who)information
gathered from Weibo posts were summarized and the physical dictionary was used for assessing
the level of physical damages, and the sentiment dictionary for assessing emotional damage. In
the third level, a semantic web was created to extract semantic patterns by analyzing prominent
“noun” based nodes such as building, factory, and so on. Similarly, Karami et al. [72]p r o p o s e da
Twitter data analysis framework, TwiSA, that implements lexicon-based sentiment analysis and
LDA-based temporal topic discovery. The framework concentrates on text analysis for extracting
situationalinformationtosupportthepreparedness,response,andrecoveryphasesofthedisaster
management cycle.
A two-stage classification model was proposed by Rizk et al. [116] for identifying tweets that
reportdamagestoeitherhuman-madestructuresorthenaturalenvironment.First,visualfeatures
andsemanticfeatureswereextractedindependentlyfromtweets.Theextractedfeatureswerethen
passedontothenextstageofclassifiersforthefinalclassification.SVM,Ensemble-based,andANN
modelsweretrainedonadisastertweetscorpusandascenedataset.Adomain-specificdenseBoW
model was generated for building semantic descriptors. The authors reported that the addition of
semantic features alongside low-level visual features improved classification performance.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:15
Table 3. Overview of the Literature in “Disaster” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Dataset Geo Scope Tasks Best outcome
Identifying
relevant
data
2013 [ 65] 346K tweets Joplin T,S a n d yH Cf,SeqLbl Accuracy:
80%–90%
2014 [ 69] 1K Ushahidi
reports, 90M
tweets
Haiti AdSt Qual. disc.
presented
2018 [ 10] 9M tweets, 191K
images
HarveyH,I r m aH,
MariaH
Cf,NER,TpMd Accuracy:
76%–90%
2019 [ 116] 1.34K tweets Nepal, Chile,
Japan, Kenya
Cf,LLVFE,
SemExt
Accuracy: 92.43%
2019 [ 124] 67K Weibo posts China SmEx, TpMd 5/8 close
predictions
2020 [ 166] 20M tweets Global Cf F-measure:
0.69–0.95
2020 [ 72] 1M tweets South Carolina SnAn,TpMd Qual. disc.
presented
Mining
systems
2012 [ 119] 597 tweets Japan Cf,SemExt,
SnAn
F-measure: 0.73
2014 [ 63] 200 tweets Global Cf AUC: 80%
2014 [ 61] 700–850 images Global Cf AUC: 78%
2014 [ 14] 17M tweets North America Cf,Clu AUC: 88%
Assessment
of disasters
2016 [ 78] 52.5M Sandy H AdSt,SnAn Stat. analysis
presented
2017 [ 100] 12.9M tweets Sandy H Cf,SnAn Accuracy: 75.91%
2018 [ 113]1 . 5 K t w e e t s
(subset)
California TpMd Fleiss kappa
score: 0.886
2018 [ 155] 970K tweets Sandy H AdSt,SnAn,
TpMd
Corr. coef.: 0.989
2019 [ 56] 7.76K unique
tweets
Mexico City Cf,DnEs Avg. F-measure:
0.84
2020 [ 168] 39K geo tweets Florence H Cf,TpMd Avg. Accuracy:
74.23
Benchm-
arking
2016 [ 27] 2.82K tweets Global Cf Accuracy:
75.90%–82.52%
2017 [ 101] 21K tweets Global Cf AUC:
81.21%–94.17%
2018 [ 111] 70K tweets India, Pakistan Cf F-measure:
0.72–0.94
2020 [ 117] 2.18K/60K tweets Chile, Catalonia Cf Accuracy:
81.2%–85.8%
T represents tornado.Hrepresents hurricane.
Zahra et al. [166] trained multiple classifiers for four different disasters—floods, hurricanes,
earthquakes, and wildfires—using crowd-sourced labelled data to classify disaster specific tweets
into three categories: eyewitness, non-eyewitness, and don’t know. The authors used different
combinations of textual features and domain-expert selected features. The study reported that
perceptual senses are usually found in tweets created by direct eyewitnesses, whereas emotions
and prayer-specific terms are found in tweets from indirect eyewitnesses.
Similarly,Alametal.[ 10]performedatextualcontentanalysisonTwitterdatacollectedduring
threehurricanes—Harvey,Irma,andMaria.Thestudyinvolvedunderstandinghumanitarianneeds
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 16 ---
77:16 R. Lamsal et al.
byusingRFclassifiers,learningtheconcernsofaffectedpopulationthroughsentimentusingStan-
ford’ssentimentanalysisclassifier, 6 trackingincidentsbyimplementingLDAfortopic-modelling,
and identifying notable entities through name entity recognition. The authors also performed a
multimedia analysis using a TL-based deep image recognition model to identify the relevance of
images to disastrous events.
3.2.2 Mining Systems. Imran et al. [63] presented a data-mining platform,Artificial Intelli-
gence for Disaster Response (AIDR), for the automatic classification of crisis-specific Twitter
data into categories related to community needs, loss of lives, and damages. The platform utilizes
threecorecomponents:acollectorforretrievingtweets,ataggerforclassificationoftweets,anda
trainerfortrainingtheclassifierpresentinthetaggercomponent.Theplatformautomaticallycol-
lects tweets created during humanitarian crises and trains on a sample of labelled data. A similar
classification platform with an SVM classifier, MicroFilters, was developed by Ilyas [61] for classi-
fying images present in tweets. Tweedr [14] is also a Twitter data-mining tool that engages three
operations in its data analysis pipeline: classification for classifying disaster specific tweets into
categories such as damages and casualties, clustering for merging similar tweets, and extraction
for extracting words and phrases corresponding to damages and casualties.
Sakaki et al. [119] studied the real-time nature of tweets for event detection. The authors pro-
posed an earthquake reporting system that analyzes disaster-related tweets for detecting and
estimatingthelocationofearthquakeevents(spatialestimation).Theybuiltaprobabilisticspatio-
temporal model using features such as the essential keywords in a tweet, the number of words in
a tweet, and the context of the words specific to an event.
3.2.3 Assessment of Disasters. Resch et al. [113] presented an approach to combine semantic
information extracted from tweets with spatial and temporal analysis to assess the affected ar-
eas and damages caused by natural disasters. The authors employed LDA for topic-modelling in
two iterations—LDA was further applied to the results from the first iteration to identify granu-
lar topics. When validated against a manually annotated sample of tweets, their results showed
thattheaffectedareasanddamagescausedbydisasterscouldbereliablyidentifiedbydiscovering
similarities in spatial, temporal, and semantic details extracted from tweets.
HierarchicalmultiscaleanalysiswasconductedbyWuandCui[ 155]tounderstandtheroleofso-
ciallygenerateddatabefore,during,andafteradisasterandinvestigateifthejointuseofsuchdata
alongside spatial information helps in disaster assessment. The authors used an opinion lexicon
resource to compute sentiment polarity and performed hashtag and keyword frequency analysis
for topic discovery. Results from the textual analysis were combined with spatio-temporaldata to
assessthedamagesdonebyHurricaneSandy.Theresultsshowedtheintensityofdisaster-specific
conversations originating from a region significantly correlating with the severity of damages.
Neppalli et al. [100] showed that the sentiment of a population changes based on its distance
from a disaster. The authors used lexicon methods to compute the polarity of tweets. Next, they
classifiedpolartweetsaspositiveandnegativeusingNBandSVMclassifiers.Thestudyconcluded
that the mapping of sentiments during a disaster could uncover more vital situation awareness.
Similarly,Kryvasheyeuetal.[ 78]showedthatthespatio-temporalanalysisofTwitterdataassists
in the rapid assessment of disaster damage. The authors performed sentiment analysis on tweets
createdbefore,during,andafterHurricaneSandytoexamineifsentimentcanbeusedasapredic-
tor for assessing damages. The study showed negative sentiments correlating with damages and
concluded that the proximity of the hurricane’s path was highly correlated with tweet activity.
6https://nlp.stanford.edu/sentiment/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:17
Fig. 6. A methodological view of the literature in “Disasters” thematic area.
InReference[ 168],Zhaietal.categorizedneighborhoodsbasedonpoorandnon-poorattributes
and used geo-tagged tweets alongside socio-demographic data to understand disaster situation
awareness from the perspective of neighborhood equity. They implemented LDA to identify spe-
cific topics associated with each neighborhood and trained an LR model for sentiment analysis.
Their results showed that poor areas are more likely to share negative opinions, as people from
those communities are more likely to have their work affected during disasters.
Hernandez-Suarez et al. [56] used word vectors derived from a corpus of tweets to train aBidi-
rectional Long Short-Term Memory (biLSTM)network. They used aConditional Random
Field (CRF)output layer for improving classification accuracy. A toponym was formed based on
labelledwordsandwasgeocodedandfinallyscoredbyaKDEfunction.Theauthorsvisualizedthe
results on a map to identify concentration of disasters.
3.2.4 Benchmarking. Disaster-specific tweets were analyzed by Ragini et al. [111] to identify
the best feature set for sentiment analysis using: (i) BoW +Parts of Speech (POS)tagging and
(ii) bigram and trigram subjective phrases. The authors used multiple lexicon-based methods to
extract subjective tweets, as such tweets contain the sentiments of people compared to objective
ones. Their results showed that the combination of subjective phrases and ML models trained on
bigram features performs best for disaster-specific Twitter data.
The performance of Bayesian network classifiers was benchmarked by Ruz et al. [117] against
sentiment analysis on disaster-specific tweets. The authors trained multiple learning models on
tweetsrelatedtotheChileanearthquakeandtheCatalanindependencereferendum.Theirresults
favored SVM and RF models; however, the tree augmented NB model was seen to produce com-
petitiveresults,thusvalidatingtheapplicabilityofBayesiannetworksforanalyzingsentimentsof
disaster-related tweets.
CNN models have been shown to outperform BoW models in the task of identifying informa-
tive messages from a stream of tweets during disastrous events. Caragea et al. [27]u s e dt h eB o W
modelasafeaturerepresentationfortrainingmultipleSVMandANNmodelsusingvariouscombi-
nationsof n-grams.TheresultsshowedtheirCNNmodeloutperformingallANNandSVMmodels.
The ANN model trained on unigrams and bigrams achieved the second-best accuracy; however,
the margin was <2%. Similar results were obtained in another study [101], where CNN models
outperformed non-neural network models.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure6.
3.3 Finance
The stock markets, startups, and company-specific events are often discussed topics across so-
cial media. The discourse generated by financial communities on microblogs has been shown to
correlate with stock options pricing, market movements, events’ popularity, stock returns, and
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 18 ---
77:18 R. Lamsal et al.
Table 4. Overview of the Literature in “Finance” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Geo Scope Tasks Best outcome
Dataset
Stock
market
analysis
2011 [ 23] 9.85M tweets United
States
Reg,
SnAn
Direction Accuracy: 86.7%
2012 [ 172] 3.8M retweets United
States
Reg,
SnAn
Retweets are predictive of
market movements
2015 [ 88] Twitter metrics
of firms
United
States
AdSt, Clu Twitter metrics predict stocks
comovement
2016 [ 34] ≈160K tweets Global Reg,
SnAn
Tweets’ volume is an essential
feature for financial forecasting
models.
2016 [ 171] 50M tweets Global Reg,
SnAn
Happiness sentiments can
Granger-cause the changes in
index return
2016 [ 152] 3.28K Twitter
volume spikes
United
States
AdSt Volume spikes correlate with
stock pricing when price
change is extreme
2017 [ 89] 133K tweets United
States
Reg,
SnAn
Goodness-of-fit: 0.9776
2017 [ 164] Daily happiness
index
Global Reg,
SnAn
Investors’ sentiment correlate
to stock returns
2018 [ 102] 60K tweets United
Kingdom
Reg,
SnAn
Presence of correlation
between public sentiment and
investment behavior
Company-
specific
analysis
2017 [ 38] 192K tweets United
States
Cf,SnAn Case study-specific results
2017 [ 86] 17K tweets United
States
Reg,
SnAn
Negative relationship between
sentiment and stock return.
2019 [ 129] 53K tweets India TpMd,
SnAn
Indian startup ecosystem is
more inclined towards positive
sentiments.
2019 [ 122] 35K tweets Global TpMd,
SnAn
Qualitative results presented
sustainable startups and business models. Table4 provides an overview of the literature in this
theme.
3.3.1 StockMarketAnalysis. Liuetal.[ 88]proposedamodelforpredictingstockcomovement
based on social media metrics. The authors reported that firms with official Twitter accounts had
highercomovement.AfteranalyzingdatafromtheNYSEandtheNASDAQstockexchanges,they
concluded that Twitter metrics, such as the number of followers and number of tweets created,
highly correlate with the comovement of stocks. Further, they created homogeneous groups of
firms usingK-Means based on their Twitter metrics to show that they contribute to a better pre-
diction of comovement than industry-specific label.
Wei et al. [152] investigated the relationship between Twitter content volume spikes and stock
pricing. They considered a volume spike when the number of tweets in a day was greater than
the average number of tweets in the lastN days. They used the relative value of the number of
tweets and added thresholds against the number of unique users and their diversity to avoid false
volume spikes. Their analysis revealed that the volume spikes correlate with stock pricing when
the change in the price is extreme.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:19
Bollen et al. [23] extracted seven public mood time series from tweets to investigate if those
mood descriptors are predictive of future stock values. The authors used Granger causality analy-
sistocorrelatetheextractedmoodtimeserieswithDJIAvalues.Theyreportedthatnotallbutsome
among the seven mood descriptors were Granger-causative of the stock exchange’s values. Simi-
larly,Zhangetal.[ 172]triedtoidentifytherelationshipbetweenTwitterdataandfinancialmarket
movement, such as gold price and stock market indicators. Six different opinion time series were
extractedfromalarge-scaleretweetsdatasetcontainingthefollowingsixkeywords: ‘‘dollar,’’
‘‘gold,’’ ‘‘$,’’ ‘‘job,’’ ‘‘economy,’’and ‘‘oil.’’TheauthorsappliedGrangercausality
analysis to the opinion time series versus financial market movement to show that the retweet
information is correlated to and predictive of market movement.
Corea [34] analyzed Twitter data, concerning Apple, Facebook, and Google, to study if tweets
can be considered representative of investors’ sentiments. The author implemented Stepwise Re-
gression for finding the best set of variables. The results showed that how much the public talks
about a stock is more valuable than what they think about it. The authors observed the volume
of tweets had a positive correlation with the stock price. In a similar study by You et al. [164],
investors’ sentiment showed to be a significant driving force on excess stock returns. Similarly,
López-Cabarcos [89] analyzed Twitter data to understand the influence of technical and non-
technical investors on the stock market. The authors designed logit and probit models using the
predictorsderivedfromTwitterprofilessuchasexperienceininvesting,numberoffollowers,hold-
ingperiod.Thestudyshowedthattheopinionsofnon-technicalinvestorshadrelevancewiththe
market risk, while for the technical ones, their opinions were insignificant.
Zhang et al. [171] extracted happiness indices from Twitter data for 11 international stock mar-
ketsandcompareditwithindexreturn.Theresultsfromtheircorrelationregressionmodelshowed
apositiveinfluenceofhappinesssentimentonindexreturnandopening/closingpriceofatrading
session.Similarly,NisarandYeung[ 102]presentedevidenceofacorrelationbetweenpublicopin-
ion and stock market price. The authors collected political-related tweets created before, during,
andafterthe2016UKlocalelectionsandperformedcorrelationandregressionanalysisonthesen-
timentofthetweetsandthedailychangeinthepriceofFTSE100.Theirstudyshowedpromising
results to support Twitter data as a medium for forecasting market price.
3.3.2 Company-specific Analysis. Daniel et al. [38] proposed a system to find event popularity
through the sentiment of tweets concerning a company. Multiple public and a custom lexicon-
basedsentimentanalyzerswereusedtocomputesentimentscores.Eventdetectionwasdonebased
on the peaks and drops observed in the average sentiment of the tweets. One of their case studies
involving a Fortune 500 company showed people’s excitement during the launch of product A
relatively higher than product B, where B was a minor upgrade to A.
LeitchandSherif[ 86]designedregressionmodelsbasedonpredictorssuchaspublicsentiment
during the announcement of a newChief Executive Officer (CEO), location of the company,
number of employees, and various features associated with the CEO, including gender, degree de-
tails,andexperience,tostudyifTwittersentimentyieldsanyrelationshipwithstockreturns.Their
resultsreportedthatthesentimentscorehadasignificantnegativecorrelationwithstockreturns,
whiletheageoftheCEOhadasignificantpositivecorrelation.Featuressuchasgender,experience,
and number of employees reported positive correlation but were statistically insignificant.
Singh et al. [129] used Twitter data to analyze the startup ecosystem in India. The authors col-
lected tweets from 15 different startups across multiple industries and applied NB for sentiment
analysis and LDA for topic modelling. They reported that the Indian startup ecosystem was in-
clined towards positive sentiments, as the startups were more concerned about digital technolo-
gies,people,planet,andprofit.Morespecifically,startupsincitieswiththeavailabilityofresources,
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 20 ---
77:20 R. Lamsal et al.
Fig. 7. A methodological view of the literature in “Finance” thematic area.
connectivity, and a huge market base seemed to be finding it easy to do business. Similarly, Saura
etal.[ 122]usedSVMforsentimentanalysisandLDAfortopicmodellingontweetsusinghashtags
relatedtostartupstoidentifyindicatorsforasuccessfulstartupbusiness.Theirstudyshowedthat
the founders’ attitudes and methodologies were associated with positive sentiments. In contrast,
frameworks, and programming languages were some of the factors inducing negative sentiments.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure7.
3.4 Physical Environment
Whileconsideringmicroblogusersas“environmentmonitoringsensors,”researchershaveapplied
awiderangeofanalyticalstrategiesthatexploitmicroblogdatatogeneratevaluableinsightscon-
cerning traffic patterns, conditions, and incidents, weather situations, outdoor air pollution, cli-
mate change, and global warming. Table5provides an overview of the literature in this theme.
3.4.1 Weather and Climate. In Reference [48], Giuffrida et al. analyzed tweets containing
weather-related keywords alongside meteorological data to show that Twitter can be regarded as
an alternative data source for assessing the effect of weather on human outdoor perception. The
authors trained an opinion-based classifier to classify tweets as relevant or irrelevant and further
categorizetherelevantonesintoneutral,positive,ornegative.Tweetswerenextanalyzedtogether
with meteorological data to establish comfort ranges. The ranges identified through tweets anal-
ysis were found to be in good agreement with the ranges derived through questionnaires and
interviews.
Kirilenko and Stepchenkova [75] reported the US, UK, Canada, and Australia to have created
more discourse related to climate change on Twitter than the rest of the world. The study per-
formed spatio-temporal and network analyses to identify daily patterns of discourse, the signifi-
cant events affecting the discourse, and the most influential media houses and Twitter users. In
Reference [66], Jang and Hart performed a content analysis on tweets related to climate change
originating from the US, UK, Canada, and Australia between 2012–14. The authors constructed
five representative frames, namely, Real, Hoax, Cause, Impact, and Action, based on associated
keywords to extract the relative prevalence of each frame, country-wise. The study summarized
that hoaxes are common, and the Cause, Impact, and Action-based Twitter discourse are compar-
atively lower in the US.
Chen et al. [33] analyzed similar climate change-related tweets to explore the temporal details
of climate change discourse and identify Twitter users that deny the existence of climate change.
The related English keywords were translated into 34 different languages, and the resulting set of
keywordswasusedforfilteringthetweets.Asampleof2KtweetswasannotatedtotrainanANN
modelforclassifyingtheusersasdeniersandnon-deniers.Theirexploratoryanalysisshowedthat
the discussion about climate change is driven by extreme weather events and changes in policies.
3.4.2 Pollution. InReference[ 59],Hswenetal.studiedifTwitterdatacanbeusedformonitor-
ing outdoor air pollution. The authors collected geo-tagged tweets (non-media) containing air
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:21
Table 5. Overview of the Literature in “Physical Environment” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Dataset Geo Scope Tasks Best outcome
Weather
and climate
analysis
2014 [ 75] 1.85M tweets Global SpTmMd,
NetAn
Qual. disc.
presented
2015 [ 66]R n d s m p . o f
500 tweets
Global CoFqAn Precision: 96%
2019 [ 33] 2K tweets Global WoVec,Cf Accuracy: 88%
2020 [ 48] 38K tweets United States SnAn Class. Accuracy:
88%
Pollution
analysis
2018 [ 118] 39K geo-tagged
tweets
California TpMd Stat. analysis
presented
2019 [ 59] 60K tweets Greater London SnAn, AdSt Corr. coef.: 0.816
Road and
traffic
analysis
2010 [ 28] 565K tweets Portugal Cf F-measure: 0.96%
2015 [ 147] 245K tweets Chicago SpTmMd,
AdSt
Stat. analysis
presented
2015 [ 49]S y s t e m
self-collects data
Melbourne Clu Qual. disc.
presented
2015 [ 136] 200 tweets India NER F-measure: 0.918
2015 [ 37] 1.33K/999 tweets Italy Cf F-measure: 0.957
2016 [ 51] 10K/11K tweets Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia
Cf F-measure: 0.95
2017 [ 142] 9.70K tweets United Kingdom TpMd, Cf Recall: >90%
2019 [ 35] 51K tweets United States WoVec,Cf F-measure: 0.986
2020 [ 44] 9K geo-tagged
tweets
United Kingdom Reg MAE: 5.5
2021 [ 161] 1.78M tweets Pittsburgh SnAn, Clu Accuracy:
0.88±0.05
pollution terms from Greater London and performed sentiment analysis on the tweets using
VADER.7 Next,cross-correlationanalysiswasdonetofindrelationshipsbetweensentimenttrends
and levels of PM2.5 (particles with diameter less than 2.5 micrometers). Their results showed a
significant correlation between negative sentiment tweets and PM2.5 data, thereby hinting that
Twitter users from a densely populated area can be treated as “social sensors” of PM2.5 levels.
Sachdeva and McCaffrey [118] studied the effectiveness of using Twitter data in ascertaining
the impacts of wildfire events on air quality. The authors used structural topic model for topic
modelling.Topicsrelatedto“smoke”werethenidentifiedfortaggingtweets.Theirspatio-temporal
modelusedthistaggedinformationforassessingtherelationshipbetweenthefrequencyofsmoke-
relatedtweetswithdailyPM2.5levels.Theirresultsshowedthatthetweetsrelatingtosmokewere
better predictors of air quality than tweets related to more generic wildfire discourse.
3.4.3 Traffic. Tejaswin et al. [136]designedanincidentalertandmappingsystembyextracting
location entities from tweets that describe traffic situations. To deal with the sparsity of data, the
authors created multiple grids of the overall city area and grouped traffic incidents to generate
statistics on historical data for extracting real-time insights. Predictors such as weather data, grid
number,andtemporaldetailwereusedfortraininganRFclassifierforpredictingtrafficincidents.
Essien et al. [44] mined geo-tagged Twitter data together with traffic and weather information
to study if such data can improve urban traffic flow prediction. The authors trained a biLSTM
stackedautoencodermodelandevaluateditonanurbanroadnetworkintheUK.Theyprioritized
7https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 22 ---
77:22 R. Lamsal et al.
Fig. 8. A methodological view of the literature in “Physical Environment” thematic area.
the tweets created from the official Twitter accounts of road-traffic organizations to deal with
authenticity and veracity issues. Their results showed that combining Twitter data with traffic,
rainfall, and temperature data assists in a design of a more accurate traffic flow prediction model.
Wang et al. [147] proposed a traffic congestion estimation framework by using information re-
gardingtrafficfromTwitter.Afrequent-patternspatialandtemporalanalysiswasdonetoidentify
the road networks that are more likely to have co-occurring congestions. Their estimation ap-
proach also considered social events within the city as supplementary information. The authors
used the time and location of such events to model the impact on traffic in the nearby roads us-
ingaGaussiandistribution.Similarly,YaoandQian[ 161]extractedsleep-wakestatus,localevent
details, and traffic incidents as tweeting profiles and used the following generalizations to build a
predictionframeworkfornextmorningcommutecongestion:(i)roadsarecongestedthefollowing
morning if people sleep earlier, (ii) lower travel demand the following day if the earlier evening
had social events. Their approach outperformed existing approaches that excluded Twitter data.
Inasimilarstudy,Gongetal.[ 49]utilizedcreatedtimeandgeocoordinatesinformationextracted
fromtweetdatadictionariestoidentifyaroadascongestedifmultipletweetssharesimilarspatial
and temporal attributes. The authors used a density-based clustering and assumed the presence
of congestion if four or more tweets are created in 1 km stretch of road within a 15-minute time
window.
Dabiri and Heaslip [35] proposed a traffic information system that processes a large volume
of Twitter data and detects traffic events. The authors used word2vec and FastText for feature
representationtotrainthreedeeplearningarchitectures(CNN,LSTM,andCNN+LSTM)toclassify
traffic-relatedinformationintothreecategories:trafficincident,trafficinformationandcondition,
andirrelevant.TheirresultsshowedtheCNNmodeltrainedonword2vecoutperformingallother
models,includingtheSVM,RF,andMLPmodelsproposedbyCarvalhoetal.[ 28],theNB,DT,and
SVM models proposed by D’Andrea et al. [37], and the semi-NB model proposed by Gu et al. [51].
Identifying relevant tweets among those created by official accounts of road administration
offices and that mention road/street is simple compared to tweets created informally from drives,
as such tweets are likely to have a significant amount of noise. To deal with this problem, Wang
et al. [142] first filtered the tweets based on a set of automatically generated keywords and then
appliedLDAtoachievehigherrecallscores.BinormalseparationandNBwordweightingschemes
were used to identify the topN set of keywords.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure8.
3.5 Politics
Researchers have analyzed microblog data to study the popularity of election candidates, predict
electionoutcomes,understandvotingintentionsofanation,detectemergingpoliticaltopics,iden-
tify probable riot events, and understand human/bot communication patterns during disruptive
events. Table6provides an overview of the literature in this theme.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:23
3.5.1 Election Analysis. Twitter has been reported as an essential source of data for comple-
menting traditional polls and surveys for political forecasting. In Reference [137], Tumasjan et al.
performedsentimentanalysisandgeneratedmultidimensionalprofilesofpoliticiansusingtweets
related to the 2009 German Federal Election. Their results showed the tweets’ sentiments corre-
spondingcloselywithvoters’politicalinclinationsandtherelativevolumeofparty-specifictweets
as a strong predictor of the federal election results. Bermingham and Smeaton [19]a l s os h o w e d
the volume of tweets as a significant predictive variable in predicting election outcomes. In Refer-
ence [45], Gaurav et al. reported that the volume-based approach in election prediction could be
improvedbyalsoconsideringdifferentaliasesusedforacandidatewhileconstructingdatasetsfor
analysis.
Wang et al. [143] designed a real-time tweets sentiment analysis system targeting the 2012 US
PresidentialElection.Theauthorsusedaround200rulesforfilteringtweetsrelatedtotheelection
campaign. A sample of relevant tweets was crowd-sourced for polarity labelling to train an NB
classifier. Sentiment trend and volume of tweets associated with each candidate were aggregated
for visualization on their dashboard. Similar sentiment-based approaches have also been used in
forecasting the winners of the 2013 Pakistani Election, the 2014 Indian Election [70], the 2015 UK
GeneralElection[ 26],the2016IndianGeneralStateElections[ 125],andthe2017FrenchPresiden-
tial Election [144].
In Reference [162], Yaqub et al. analyzed the 2016 US presidential election Twitter discourse to
evaluate how well such data represent public opinion. The keywords‘‘trump,’’ ‘‘clinton,’’
and ‘‘election2016’’ were used for pulling relevant tweets. The authors reported negative
trendsforboththecandidatesandquotedreportsthattermedthe2016electionas“themostnega-
tive campaign” to support their results. Their subsequent analysis showed that tweets containing
only the keyword‘‘trump’’ had a lower average negative score than the tweets associated to
‘‘clinton.’’ A similar methodology was used in an earlier study by Ibrahim et al. [60], where
only the positive sentiment tweets were considered candidate-wise for predicting the winner of
the 2014 Indonesian Presidential Election.
Songetal.[ 131]analyzedtweetsrelatedtothe2012KoreanPresidentialElectiontoshowTwitter
asanessentialmediumfortrackingtopicaltrends.TheauthorsperformedtemporalLDAfortopic
modellingandatermco-occurrenceanalysisfortracingchronologicallyco-occurringtopics.They
also implemented network analysis based on “user-mentions” to identify thematic connections
amongusers.Rilletal.[ 114]designedasystemforearlydetectionofcurrentandemergingpolitical
topics using Twitter. The authors considered Twitter hashtags as candidates for emerging topics
by considering the temporal change in the number of tweets associated with each hashtag, i.e.,
comparing the current number of tweetsN (H ,t ) associated with a hashtagH to the number of
tweets in the previous periodNp (H ,t−1). Their results showed that emerging topics on Twitter
couldbedetectedimmediatelyaftertheiroccurrence,andthesetopicsseemedtoappearearlieron
Twitter compared to Google Trends.
Pauletal.[ 104]designedSVMandLRclassifiersforidentifyingpoliticalandnon-politicaltweets
andperformedsentimentanalysisonthepoliticalonesconcerningtheirpoliticalalliances(Demo-
cratic or Republican). The authors used LDA and word2vec for extracting enriched keywords
specifictopoliticsandpoliticalalliancesforlabellingtweets.Theytrainedunigram-andunigram-
bigram-based models using SVM and LR. Sentiment Analysis was performed on tweets at the
political affiliation level, for which the authors showed the FastText-based model outperforming
SVM, LR, NB, and LSTM models.
Barberá [15]u s e daMarkov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based method to estimate the
political ideology of people by exploiting their “following” profiles on Twitter. The author
used a NoU-Turn sampler and a random-walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm for estimating the
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 24 ---
77:24 R. Lamsal et al.
Table 6. Overview of the Literature in “Politics” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Dataset Geo Scope Tasks Best outcome
Election
Analysis
2011 [137] 100K tweets Germany SnAn,CoFqAn MAE: 1.65%
2011 [19] 7.2K tweets Ireland SnAn,CoFqAn, Reg MAE:
3.67%–5.85%
2012 [143] 17K tweets United States SnAn,Cf Accuracy: 59%
2013 [45] 62K tweets Latin America CoFqAn Average RMS:
<0.03
2014 [131] 1.73M tweets South Korea TpMd,NetAn –
2014 [114] 4M tweets Germany CoFqAn,SnAn Corr. coef.: 0.68
2015 [15] 759K Twitter users United States AdSt Stat. analysis
presented
2015 [60] 10M tweets Indonesia SnAn MAE: 0.61%
2015 [70] 23M tweets India, Pakistan SnAn Corr. coef.:
0.83–0.986
2016 [125] 42K tweets India SnAn Accuracy: 78.4%
2016 [26] 13.8M United Kingdom SnAn Stat. analysis
presented
2017 [162] 3.1M tweets United States SnAn –
2017 [104] 2M geo tweets United States TpMd,SnAn, SpTmMd F-measure: 0.930
2017 [144] Not-specified France SnAn 2% difference from
fact
Riots
Analysis
2017 [12] 40M/1.6M tweets England NER,SnAn,Cf,Clu F-measure: 85.43%
2020 [81] 4.5M tweets Germany, United
States, Catalonia
SnAn,NetAn Stat. analysis
presented
parametersαj (measureofpopularityof j)and βi (measureofpoliticalinterestof i)indexedby jand
i,respectively,where i andj relatetoasampleof10K i-usersthatfollowatleast10 j-users.Thepro-
posedmethoddistinguishesthepoliticalorientationofbothpoliticalfiguresandordinarycitizens
with their location on the ideological scale associated with “left-wing” and “right-wing” politics.
3.5.2 Riots Analysis. Alsaedi et al. [12] proposed an event detection framework for detecting
probable disruptive events such as riots using Twitter. The framework utilizes an NB classifier to
filterevent-relatedtweetsfromnon-eventtweets.Anonlineclusteringalgorithmthengroupsthe
extractedevent-relatedtweetstoidentifypotentiallydisruptiveeventsbasedonspatial,temporal,
and textual features extracted from the tweets. The textual features list also included cosine simi-
larity, sentiment polarity, mention ratio, hashtag ratio, and URL ratio. Next, a temporal TF-IDF is
used for summarizing and representing the topics discussed in each cluster.
Kušen and Strembeck [81] performed lexicon-based sentiment analysis on tweets using man-
ually selected keywords and hashtags to identify the influence of bots during riot events. The
authors used scores computed by Botometer8 to distinguish if an account is a bot. They further
constructedtwotypesofdirectedcommunicationnetworks,ahuman-accounts-onlynetworkand
an all-accounts network, using the “mentions” information available in the tweets. Their findings
showed that bot accounts were more involved in amplifying negative emotions to influence the
overallsentimentofthediscourse.Thebotaccountswerealsonoticedreceivingsignificantsocial
interactions from human accounts, as the bot accounts seemed to be regarded as credible sources
of information.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure9.
8https://botometer.osome.iu.edu/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:25
Fig. 9. A methodological view of the literature in “Politics” thematic area.
3.6 Health and Population
Public health-related microblog data concerning epidemics such as Influenza, Zika, Dengue,
prescription drug abuse, and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been used for
predicting new case counts, extracting detailed insights of the illness/abuse, tracking the flow of
conspiracy theories and misinformation. Table7 provides an overview of the literature in this
theme.
3.6.1 EpidemicAnalysis. Basedonflu-relatedtweetscollectedbetween2009and2010,Achrekar
etal.[ 4]designedauto-regressionmodelstoshowthatthevolumeoftweetshighlycorrelateswith
the number of influenza-like illness cases. Also, Masri et al. [93] used auto-regressive models on
weekly Zika epidemic case counts and tweets for estimating the number of cases, on a weekly
basis, one week in advance.
Aramaki et al. [13] trained an SVM classifier to identify true influenza tweets and used them
asapredictorforinfluenzaepidemicsdetection.Theirmethodoutperformedapproachesthatcon-
sidered the use of overall volume of tweets or used Google trends data. Similarly, de Almeida
Marques-Toledo et al. [39] tracked‘‘Dengue,’’ ‘‘aedes,’’ and ‘‘aegypti’’ keywords to col-
lecttweetsandemployedaclassifiertoidentifytweetsrelatedtopersonalexperiencewithDengue.
The authors used the total number of captured tweets and Dengue cases to design a generalized
additive model. Their results showed that tweets have a strong potential to be an explanatory
variable for Dengue estimation models.
Mamidi et al. [90] trained multiple word2vec andn-gram-based LR, SVM, and RF models for
analyzing sentiments of tweets concerning Zika and further identified the main topics within the
negative sentiment tweets to distinguish the significant concerns of the targeted population.
Twitter data has been observed as useful for providing insights into the prescription drug epi-
demic [128]. Phan et al. [107] collected tweets concerning well-known prescription and illegal
drugs and trained SVM, DT, RF, and NB classifiers to identify signals of drug abuse in the tweets.
Their proposed drug-abuse-detection model could identify relationships between‘‘Abuse’’ and
‘‘Fentanyl,’’ ‘‘Addiction’’ and ‘‘Heroin’’, and so on. Similarly, Katsuki et al. [73] studied
therelationshipbetweenTwitterdataandpromotionof non-medicaluseofprescriptionmedi-
cations(NUPM).TheauthorstrainedanSVMclassiferonasampleoflabelleddataforidentifying
NUPM-relevanttweets.TheirresultsshowedasignificantproportionoftweetspromotingNUPM
that actively marketed illegal sales of prescription drugs of abuse. A similar result was reported
by Sarker et al. [121], where NB, SVM, Maximum Entropy, and DT classifiers were trained for
identifying tweets containing signals of medication abuse.
3.6.2 Pandemic Analysis. Chandrasekaran et al. [30] used LDA for discovering topics and
VADER for exploring associated sentiments of COVID-19-related tweets. They reported that the
average sentiment for topics such as growth and spread of cases, symptoms, racism, and political
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 26 ---
77:26 R. Lamsal et al.
Table 7. Overview of the Literature in “Health and Population” Thematic Area
Direction Year Study Primary Dataset Geo Scope Tasks Best outcome
Epidemic
Analysis
2011 [ 4] 4.7M tweets Global CoFqAn, Reg Corr. coef.: 0.9846
2011 [ 13] 0.4M tweets Global AdSt,CoFqAn,
Cf
Corr. coef.: 0.89
2015 [ 73] 2.4M tweets United States Cf Accuracy:
93.5%–95.1%
2016 [ 121] 129K tweets Global Cf Accuracy: 85%
2017 [ 39] 1.65M tweets Brazil CoFqAn, Cf,
Reg
MRE: 0.345
2017 [ 107] 31K tweets United States Cf F-measure: 0.746
2019 [ 90] 48K tweets Zika affected
regions
Cf,TpMd,
WoVec
F-measure: 0.68
2019 [ 93]W e e k l y b a s i s
tweets count
United States Reg,SpTmMd R2:0 . 7 4
Pandemic
Analysis
2020 [ 30] 13.9M tweets Global TpMd, SnAn Stat. analysis
presented
2020 [ 3] 167K tweets Global Cf,SnAn,
TpMd
Stat. analysis
presented
2020 [ 87] 115K Weibo posts Wuhan CoFqAn, Reg R2: 0.621
2020 [ 126] 14.9M Weibo posts China Cf,CoFqAn F1-measure: 0.880
2020 [ 158] 1M tweets Global TpMd Qual. disc.
presented
2020 [ 9] 10K tweets, 6.55K
users
United
Kingdom
CoFqAn,
NetAn
Stat. analysis
presented
2021 [ 47] 1.8M tweets Global Cf,SnAn,
TpMd
F-measure: 0.857
2021 [ 120] 574K tweets Global SnAn Stat. analysis
presented
impact was negative throughout the analysis period. In contrast, the sentiment was seen shifting
towards positivity for government response, impact on the health system, economy, and treat-
ment and recovery. Similarly, Abd-Alrazaq et al. [3] performed topic-wise sentiment analysis us-
ing LDA and TextBlob9 to show the presence of negative sentiment for deaths and racism-related
topics.
Saleh et al. [120] collected tweets containing#socialdistancing and #stayathome hashtags
foridentifyingtweetsspecifictosocialdistancing.TheyusedTextBlobforsentimentandsubjectiv-
ityanalysis.Basedonthedominanceofpositiveandsubjectivetweets,theauthorsconcludedthat
Twitter users supported the social distance measures. Xue et al. [158] collected family violence-
related tweets by tracking keywords such as‘‘family violence’’ and ‘‘child abuse’’ and
performed topic modelling using LDA. They identified nine different topical themes, including vi-
olence types, risk factors, victims, law enforcement responses, social awareness, and so on. The
studyshowedtopicmodellingasanessentialtechniqueformonitoringviolence-relatedsituations
through tweets.
Gerts et al. [47] used an RF classifier for identifying tweets concerning COVID-19 conspiracy
theoriesrelatedto5Gtechnology,Bill&MelindaGatesFoundation,originofthevirus,andCOVID-
19 vaccines. They showed that a significant amount (>40% except for the “vaccines”) of tweets
werespreadingmisinformation.Theyusedlexicon-basedmethodsforsentimentanalysistoreport
9https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:27
Fig. 10. A methodological view of the literature in “Health and Population” thematic area.
that negative sentiment is most prevalent in the tweets classified as misinformation. Similarly,
Ahmed et al. [9] collected tweets concerning the 5G and COVID-19 conspiracy by tracking the
#5GCoronavirus hashtag. The results from their network analysis hinted a lack of authorities in
combating misinformation, and content analysis revealed a significant amount (34.8%) of tweets
containing views that 5G and COVID-19 were linked.
The volume of socially generated data has been observed predictive of the number of COVID-
19 cases. In Reference [87], Li et al. analyzed Chinese language Weibo posts originating from
Wuhan and built a linear regression model to show a positive correlation between the number
ofWeibopostsandthedailycasesofCOVID-19inWuhan.Similarly,Shenetal.[ 126]designedan
RFclassifierforidentifyingWeibopoststhatreportedanythingrelatedtosymptomsanddiagnosis
(“sick messages”) of COVID-19. The authors performed Granger causality test and observed that
the number of “sick messages” could significantly predict the daily number of cases 14 days in
advance.
An illustrative summary of methodologies discussed in this thematic area is given in Figure10.
4 REVISITING THE LITERATURE
4.1 Data Corpus
Microblogs provide multiple API endpoints for accessing the public feed generated on their plat-
forms. For instance, Twitter allows two API types for accessing its content: asearch API for
searching against a sample of tweets created in the past seven days (standard version) [83] and a
streamingAPI foraccessingitsreal-timefeed.Similarly,Weiboprovidesdeveloperswitha Timeline
API for returning the latest Weibo posts and asearch API, which is restricted to a set of approved
developers, for searching historical Weibo posts [154]. Furthermore, microblogs typically provide
endpoints associated with followers, friends, geo location, favorites, reshare, trends, and so on.
In general, the literature employs two methods for curating data corpus. The first method
involves using official API endpoints to collect near real-time microblog content or search for
historical content. The second method involves hydrating content identifiers to gather complete
information.Secondmethodisemployedifamicrobloggingplatformonlyallowssharingofiden-
tifiers, such as Twitter [82], where researchers are restricted in sharing data other than tweet
identifiers [83].
4.2 The Deep Learning Trend
Duringthesurvey,weobservedthatalmosteverystudyhaditsownsetofdata.Implementingthe
same methodology on different datasets generates mixed outcomes, so quantitatively comparing
the outcomes ofthe surveyedpapersis difficult to justify.However, the tasksimplementedby the
surveyed papers concentrate on the textual and multimedia context of microblog data; therefore,
the advancements in NLP and Computer Vision undeniably expand the boundary of microblog
analytics. The ongoing radical improvements in hardware have revolutionized the deep learn-
ing sphere. Deep models seem to consistently achieve state-of-the-art outcomes in various tasks,
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 28 ---
77:28 R. Lamsal et al.
including text classification [160], sentiment analysis [67, 110], short text clustering [170], image
classification [36, 169], text summarization [7], and name entity recognition [159,165].
Inrecenttimes,deeplearningmodelshavebecomethe“go-to”methodsforsupervisedandunsu-
pervisedtasks involving numerical data, categoricaldata, time-series data, and text/image data. It
isevidentfromthesurveythatthereisasurgeintheuseofdeepmodelsafter2016.Inthispart,we
revisittheliteraturewithadditionalstudiesthatemployeddifferentdeeplearningarchitecturesfor
analyzingmicroblogdata.Therevisitincludesonlythestudiespublishedin2019orlater.Kangand
Kang [71] used a deep neural network for predicting crime occurrences, Han et al. [53]p r o p o s e d
a distributed deep anti-money laundering model, and Wei et al. [153] built a CNN-LSTM model
for hate speech detection. Neppalli et al. [99] developed a CNN model for identifying informa-
tivedisaster-specifictweets,RayChowdhuryetal.[ 112]presentedabiLSTMmodelforkeyphrase
extraction, Kumar and Singh [79] used a CNN model for extracting location names from tweets
createdduringemergencies,andLamsalandKumar[ 84]trainedword2vec-basedRNNmodelsfor
disaster response. For analyzing stock markets, Xu and Cohen [157] developed a deep generative
model, Khan et al. [74] worked on an MLP and Shi et al. [127] proposed a text-based deep model.
Similarly,ZhaiandCheng[ 167]proposedanLSTMmodelforpredictingairqualityusingWeibo
posts,Alietal.[ 11]designedabiLSTMmodelfortrafficaccidentdetectionusingTwitterandFace-
book. Beskow et al. [20] designed an LSTM-CNN model for detecting and characterizing political
memes, and Ertugrul et al. [43] developed an LSTM model for predicting future protests. Şerban
et al. [177] used a CNN-FastText model for detecting events and tracking disease outbreaks.
Furthermore, neural topic models [146,150] have been proposed as opposed to mathematically
arduous traditional methods such as LDA. Also, there are graph-based neural models [173]t h a t
aim to infer topological relationships from message passing between nodes. These neural models
have been explored across various domains, including Few-shot Image Classification, Text Clas-
sification, Sequence Labelling, Semantic Extraction, Event Extraction, Fact Verification [173]. In
general, graph representation learning methods have applications across multiple areas:unsu-
pervised—graph reconstruction (compress graphs into low-dimensional vectors), link prediction
(predicting friendship in social networks), clustering (discovering communities), visualization
(qualitative understanding of graph properties);supervised—node classification (predict node la-
bels), graph classification (predict graph labels) [29].
4.3 A Commentative Revisit
In this section, we carry out a commentative revisit to the six “thematic” areas.
Crimes. Previous studies have utilized microblog conversations for predicting future crimes,
analyzing crime rates, and studying the correlation between masses of people at different venues
and the occurrence of real crimes at those venues. Some studies implement the “grid” strategy
for identifying crime hot spots; changing the scale and shape of those grids can produce differ-
ent results—trade a “hot spot” as a “neutral spot”—thus leading to inefficient spatial assignments
of resources. Crimes such as murders and vandalism are organized in nature, and conversations
relating to them are not reflected online. Therefore, except for such crimes, researchers have con-
firmedthe contributionof microblog data to a betterunderstandingoffuture crime scenariosand
also have reinforced crime-related microblog contents as “social crime sensors.” However, the lit-
erature in this thematic area appears North America-centered; contributions from other parts of
the world seem required.
Disasters. Disaster-specific microblog conversations have been used for enhancement of sit-
uational awareness and prediction and assessment of disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
floods, cyclones, and so on. The literature in this area has contributions from researchers globally
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:29
and has the most comprehensive collections of datasets10 related to disasters and crisis events.
The continuing research in this area has led to the design of the state-of-the-artsocial media mes-
sages mining system, AIDR, which analyzes Twitter conversations created during humanitarian
crises for disaster relief. The science behind the system has been detailed over a stack of research
papers11 published through 2013, depicting the progress in the area over the years. This thematic
area,however,hasanunexploredavenueofresearch—theapplicationofdataminingon romanized
scripts.
Finance. The literature in this thematic area confirms the relationship between the conversa-
tion generated by financial communities on microblogging platforms with stock pricing, market
movements, and sustainable business models. The majority of the studies in this area seem to be
focused on time-series analysis, with the Granger-causality test, due to its computational simplic-
ity, continuing as the most favored method for causality analysis. Concerning the stock market
analysis, the literature is focused majorly on the US-based stock indexes such as NYSE, NASDAQ,
and DJIA. The existing methodologies proposed for these indexes are yet to be verified for their
generality to other countries’ stock indexes. Also, the current state of research seems to be in-
corporating only a few variables out of many possible economic variables, such as supply and
demand, company’s state (revenue, debt, an influx of investor capital, etc.), investors’ sentiment,
centralbank’spolicyoninterestrates,politics,currentevents(protests,civilwar,etc.),andforeign
exchange.
Physical Environment. Earlier studies have ascertained microblog users as “environment
monitoringsensors”;theirgeneratedonlineconversationshavebeenobservedvaluableinproduc-
ing insights associated with traffic incidents/patterns/conditions, weather situations, air quality,
and climate change. Physical monitoring systems cover only certain regions; however, bringing
onlineconversationsintothepictureforextrapolationcanyieldfine-graineddetailsforareasthat
are outside the reach of the existing monitoring systems. Next-generation systems should focus
onaddingnewtypesofcross-domaindatarelevanttopopulationactivities.Thisresearcharea,es-
peciallythetraffic-relatedapplications,consideringconversationsfromroadsareusuallyminimal,
require designing an efficient geocoder for identifying the near-accurate geographical locations
(e.g., road segments) of the origin of non-geotagged conversations.
Politics.Politics-basedmicroblogconversationshavebeenusedacrossstudiesforstudyingthe
popularity of election nominees, predicting election outcomes, discovering political topics, and
understanding communication patterns of bots and humans during riots/protests. Such analyses
get majorly influenced by rumors, spam, and misinformation. While these kinds of conversations
are an issue across all thematic areas, the wave of misinformation content when targeted to the
voters can fuel conspiracy theories that could impact the election outcome. Therefore, the early
detection of such content, the analysis of the distinctive characteristics of those content, and the
study of how they propagate should be the major concerns of future studies.
Health and Population.The literature in this area discusses the use of public-health-related
microblog conversations in predicting new epidemic/pandemic cases, extracting detailed insights
regarding an illness or abuse, and tracking conspiracy theories and misinformation trails related
to COVID-19. Studies performing early forecasts of new cases or the trend rely majorly on the
volumeofconversationsatdifferentlevels—tweetcount,sentiment-basedcount,aspecifictheme-
based count. The issue with the “volume” feature is its reliability; methods based on this feature
are highly likely to generate biased forecasts during an avalanche of auto-generated conversa-
tions.Granular-levellatenttopic-basedmodelscanaddressthisissuetosomeextent.Theliterature
10https://crisisnlp.qcri.org/.
11https://github.com/qcri-social/AIDR/wiki/The-science-behind-AIDR.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 30 ---
77:30 R. Lamsal et al.
suggests that although the conversational models show the applicability of online conversations
as an indicator of epidemic/pandemic activity, such models should be considered a supplement
butnotasubstituteforepidemiologicalmodels.Researchersgloballyareapplyingawiderangeof
analysesonpubliclyavailableCOVID-19discourse.Currently,theprimaryconcernsofresearchers
in the Crisis Computing domain is to make early forecasts of possible cases while incorporating
socialmediavariablesintotheforecastingmodels,identifytheneedsofaregionthroughdiscourse
mining,andstudythepropagationofmisinformationconcerningthediseaseanditsvaccines,such
that the proposed methodologies can be generalized to future epidemic/pandemic outbreaks.
Apart from the ones discussed above, there are a few more challenges and avenues for future
research that are common across all “thematic” areas; we briefly outline them below:
(a) Inadequate context and Data rate limitations.Microblog data is easily misinterpreted, espe-
cially when context is unavailable. Inferences can be inaccurate due to biases in microblogger
demographics towards younger and tech-savvy users, regional/local users being undistinguished
from tourists/travellers, private posts being unavailable, and lack of multi-lingual processing.
Freely available microblog data is usually rate-limited by the service providers, e.g., a few per-
centofthetotalavailabledata,orafewmillionmicroblogsperday.Broadqueries,andtechniques
like real-time query expansion, can easily saturate these limits leading to <100% recall. Precise
queries, targeting specific information, are therefore important.
(b) Ground truth and Multiple data sources.Establishing ground truth, to evaluate the effective-
ness of a given approach, can be problematic and/or involve an expensive and time-intensive pro-
cessoflabellingdata,typicallythroughcrowd-sourcingorcitizenscience.Labelleddatamaynotbe
available in real-time as a situation unfolds nor in all required languages.Weak supervision[174]
is an emerging direction to address this. It is increasingly important to complement microblog
data with information received from native sensors and also include data from Google Trends,
web-references, Reddit [91], cellular communications (SMS) [96], government agencies.
(c) Knowledge transfer and generalization. There is a significant trend towards language-
independent nonexclusive models for homogeneous events. E.g., a classification model designed
for the 2015 Nepal Earthquake should be effective at analyzing other earthquake events.
(d)Adversariesandfakeinformation. Systemsthatprocesspublicinformationcanbevulnerable
to adversaries who attack the system by posting fabricated microblog data specifically to manipu-
late the outcomes. The increasing deluge of fake information is a serious problem, and detection
and resolution of adversaries is an important research direction [80,176].
(e) Geo obfuscation/privacy.Precise geo coordinates are extremely valuable for situation aware-
ness, but at the same time microbloggers are placing increased importance on their individual
privacy. This leads to omissions and/or obfuscation of geo information; today <1% of tweets are
geotagged [83]. Use of bounding boxes and toponyms to enhance geo information needs to be
balanced with individuals’ privacy.
(f)Geo-politicalissues. Manygovernmentsareshowinganincreasingconcernoverthevulnera-
bility of their citizens and furthermore their national interests, when significant portions of their
citizen population are subjected to high-level analysis of their social media activity; particularly
when this is undertaken by companies and researchers in foreign countries.
5 CONCLUSION
AI techniques for processing microblog social media data have become a significant research di-
rectionwithapplicationsoverallareasoflife.Inthissurvey,wehaveshowntheseminalworkand
state-of-the-art approaches, from research over the past decade, in six thematic areas that cover
the majority of compelling applications today:Crime, Disasters, Finance, Physical Environment,
Politics,a n dHealth and Population. We provided a novel, integrated methodological perspective
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:31
of this body of research, in terms ofPerception, Comprehension, and Visualization/Projection—the
three stages of Situation Awareness. Our survey provides an understanding of how researchers
collect, pre-process, and analyze microblog data, with emphasis on how text, image, and spatio-
temporaldataisutilizedformodellingandanalysis.Weobservedasurgeofinterestindeeplearn-
ing methods for analyzing microblog data, and we expect research efforts to continue strongly in
this direction.
Incorporating knowledge from microblog social media data into the three stages of Situation
Awareness is a challenging task to automate due to a range of issues that we identified in this
survey. Challenges stem not only from the intrinsic nature of the data, being largely raw and un-
structured,butalsofromthefactthatpracticalsystems,havingsignificantimpactandvisibilityin
society, inevitably become the target of cyber-attacks and information manipulation from adver-
sarialthird-parties—fakenewsandmisinformationissurgingactivitythatneedstobeunderstood
andovercome.AsAIsystemsbecomemorepowerfulandassocialmediadatabecomesmoreabun-
dant and richer in semantics, we expect an increasing emphasis on the need of AI techniques to
suppress the effect of a similarly increasingly intelligent adversarial response. Researchers must
concurrently take into account privacy and security of individuals and requirements of govern-
ments and law makers, nationally and internationally.
Finally, prior to 2016, the microblog analytics domain was limited in terms of public datasets.
However, at present, the number of datasets concerning disasters, protests, politics, propaganda,
sports, climate change, and health appears to be growing at an unprecedented pace12 with many
areasyettobeaddressed.Twitter’snewacademicendpointhasalsoenabledresearcherstocollect
historical tweets at a level surpassing what has been available over the past decade. We hope that
more researchers endeavor to curate interesting datasets to support continued research in this
area.
REFERENCES
[1] Ahmed Abbasi, Donald Adjeroh, Mark Dredze, Michael J. Paul, Fatemeh Mariam Zahedi, Huimin Zhao, Nitin Walia,
Hemant Jain, Patrick Sanvanson, Reza Shaker, et al. 2014. Social media analytics for smart health.IEEE Intell. Syst.
29, 2 (2014), 60–80.
[2] Zaheer Abbass, Zain Ali, Mubashir Ali, Bilal Akbar, and Ahsan Saleem. 2020. A framework to predict social crime
through Twitter tweets by using machine learning. InProceedings of ICSC. IEEE, 363–368.
[3] AlaaAbd-Alrazaq,DariAlhuwail,MowafaHouseh,MounirHamdi,andZubairShah.2020.Topconcernsoftweeters
during the COVID-19 pandemic: Infoveillance study.J. Med. Internet Res.22, 4 (2020), e19016.
[4] HarshavardhanAchrekar,AvinashGandhe,RossLazarus,Ssu-HsinYu,andBenyuanLiu.2011.Predictingflutrends
using Twitter data. InProceedings of INFOCOM Workshops. IEEE, 702–707.
[5] Somayyeh Aghababaei and Masoud Makrehchi. 2016. Mining social media content for crime prediction. InProceed-
ings of WI. IEEE, 526–531.
[6] Somayyeh Aghababaei and Masoud Makrehchi. 2018. Mining Twitter data for crime trend prediction.Intell. Data
Anal.22, 1 (2018), 117–141.
[7] Armen Aghajanyan, Akshat Shrivastava, Anchit Gupta, Naman Goyal, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. 2020.
Better fine-tuning by reducing representational collapse. arXiv:2008.03156 (2020).
[8] Nesreen K. Ahmed, Amir F. Atiya, Neamat El Gayar, and Hisham El-Shishiny. 2010. An empirical comparison of
machine learning models for time series forecasting.Econ. Rev.29, 5–6 (2010), 594–621.
[9] Wasim Ahmed, Josep Vidal-Alaball, Joseph Downing, and Francesc López Seguí. 2020. COVID-19 and the 5G con-
spiracy theory: Social network analysis of Twitter data.J. Med. Internet Res.22, 5 (2020), e19458.
[10] Firoj Alam, Ferda Ofli, Muhammad Imran, and Michael Aupetit. 2018. A Twitter tale of three hurricanes: Harvey,
Irma, and Maria. arXiv:1805.05144 (2018).
[11] Farman Ali, Amjad Ali, Muhammad Imran, Rizwan Ali Naqvi, Muhammad Hameed Siddiqi, and Kyung-Sup Kwak.
2021.Trafficaccidentdetectionandconditionanalysisbasedonsocialnetworkingdata. Accid.Anal.Prev. 151(2021),
105973.
12https://catalog.docnow.io/.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 32 ---
77:32 R. Lamsal et al.
[12] Nasser Alsaedi, Pete Burnap, and Omer Rana. 2017. Can we predict a riot? Disruptive event detection using Twitter.
ACM Trans. Internet Technol.17, 2 (2017), 1–26.
[13] Eiji Aramaki, Sachiko Maskawa, and Mizuki Morita. 2011. Twitter catches the flu: Detecting influenza epidemics
using Twitter. InProceedings of EMNLP. 1568–1576.
[14] Zahra Ashktorab, Christopher Brown, Manojit Nandi, and Aron Culotta. 2014. Tweedr: Mining Twitter to inform
disaster response. InProceedings of ISCRAM. 269–272.
[15] Pablo Barberá. 2015. Birds of the same feather tweet together: Bayesian ideal point estimation using Twitter data.
Polit. Anal.23, 1 (2015), 76–91.
[16] Bogdan Batrinca and Philip C. Treleaven. 2015. Social media analytics: A survey of techniques, tools and platforms.
AI Soc.30, 1 (2015), 89–116.
[17] Johannes Bendler, Tobias Brandt, Sebastian Wagner, and Dirk Neumann. 2014. Investigating crime-to-Twitter rela-
tionships in urban environments-facilitating a virtual neighborhood watch. InProceedings of ECIS.
[18] YoshuaBengio,AaronCourville,andPascalVincent.2013.Representationlearning:Areviewandnewperspectives.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.35, 8 (2013), 1798–1828.
[19] Adam Bermingham and Alan Smeaton. 2011. On using Twitter to monitor political sentiment and predict election
results. InProceedings of SAAIP. 2–10.
[20] David M. Beskow, Sumeet Kumar, and Kathleen M. Carley. 2020. The evolution of political memes: Detecting and
characterizing internet memes with multi-modal deep learning.Inf. Process. Manag.57, 2 (2020), 102170.
[21] Christopher M. Bishop. 2006.Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer.
[22] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with subword
information. Trans. Comput. Linguist. Assoc. Comput. Linguist.5 (2017), 135–146.
[23] JohanBollen,HuinaMao,andXiaojunZeng.2011.Twittermoodpredictsthestockmarket. J.Comput.Sci. 2,1(2011),
1–8.
[24] Béla Bollobás. 1998.Modern Graph Theory. Vol. 184. Springer Science & Business Media.
[25] Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Peter V. Desouza, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. 1992. Class-based
n-gram models of natural language.Comput. Linguist.18, 4 (1992), 467–480.
[26] PeteBurnap,RachelGibson,LukeSloan,RosalyndSouthern,andMatthewWilliams.2016.140characterstovictory?:
Using Twitter to predict the UK 2015 General Election.Elect. Stud.41 (2016), 230–233.
[27] Cornelia Caragea, Adrian Silvescu, and Andrea H. Tapia. 2016. Identifying informative messages in disasters using
convolutional neural networks. InProceedings of ISCRAM.
[28] SaraCarvalho,LuisSarmento,andRosaldoRossettiJ.F.2010.Real-timesensingoftrafficinformationinTwittermes-
sages. InProceedings of IEEE ITSC.https://www.mendeley.com/catalogue/65b509dd-f94a-33fe-9b87-612176de9bec/.
[29] InesChami,SamiAbu-El-Haija,BryanPerozzi,ChristopherRé,andKevinMurphy.2020.Machinelearningongraphs:
A model and comprehensive taxonomy. arXiv:2005.03675 (2020).
[30] Ranganathan Chandrasekaran, Vikalp Mehta, Tejali Valkunde, and Evangelos Moustakas. 2020. Topics, trends, and
sentimentsoftweetsabouttheCOVID-19pandemic:Temporalinfoveillancestudy. J.Med.InternetRes. 22,10(2020),
e22624.
[31] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. InProceedings of ICML. PMLR, 1597–1607.
[32] XinyuChen,YoungwoonCho,andSukYoungJang.2015.CrimepredictionusingTwittersentimentandweather.In
Proceedings of SIEDS. IEEE, 63–68.
[33] XingyuChen,LeiZou,andBoZhao.2019.DetectingclimatechangedeniersonTwitterusingadeepneuralnetwork.
In Proceedings of ICMLC. 204–210.
[34] FrancescoCorea.2016.CanTwitterproxytheinvestors’sentiment?Thecaseforthetechnologysector. BigDataRes.
4 (2016), 70–74.
[35] Sina Dabiri and Kevin Heaslip. 2019. Developing a Twitter-based traffic event detection model using deep learning
architectures.Expert Syst. Appl.118 (2019), 425–439.
[36] ZihangDai,HanxiaoLiu,QuocV.Le,andMingxingTan.2021.CoAtNet:Marryingconvolutionandattentionforall
data sizes. arXiv:2106.04803 (2021).
[37] EleonoraD’Andrea,PietroDucange,BeatriceLazzerini,andFrancescoMarcelloni.2015.Real-timedetectionoftraffic
from Twitter stream analysis.IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.16, 4 (2015), 2269–2283.
[38] Mariana Daniel, Rui Ferreira Neves, and Nuno Horta. 2017. Company event popularity for financial markets using
Twitter and sentiment analysis.Expert Syst. Appl.71 (2017), 111–124.
[39] Cecilia de Almeida Marques-Toledo, Carolin Marlen Degener, Livia Vinhal, Giovanini Coelho, Wagner Meira, Clau-
dia Torres Codeço, and Mauro Martins Teixeira. 2017. Dengue prediction by the web: Tweets are a useful tool for
estimating and forecasting Dengue at country and city level.PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis.11, 7 (2017), e0005729.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:33
[40] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[41] Michael Dewing. 2010.Social Media: An Introduction. Vol. 1. Library of Parliament Ottawa.
[42] Mica R. Endsley. 2000. Theoretical underpinnings of situation awareness: A critical review. Situat. Awaren.
Anal. Meas.(2000), 1. https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/mono/10.1201/b12461-7/theoretical-underpinnings-
situation-awareness-critical-review-mica-endsley-daniel-garland .
[43] AliMertErtugrul,Yu-RuLin,Wen-TingChung,MuhengYan,andAngLi.2019.Activismviaattention:Interpretable
spatiotemporal learning to forecast protest activities.EPJ Data Sci.8, 1 (2019), 1–26.
[44] AniekanEssien,IliasPetrounias,PedroSampaio,andSandraSampaio.2020.Adeep-learningmodelforurbantraffic
flow prediction with traffic events mined from Twitter.World Wide Web24, 4 (2020), 1–24.
[45] Manish Gaurav, Amit Srivastava, Anoop Kumar, and Scott Miller. 2013. Leveraging candidate popularity on Twitter
to predict election outcome. InProceedings of SNAKDD.1 – 8 .
[46] Matthew S. Gerber. 2014. Predicting crime using Twitter and kernel density estimation.Decis. Supp. Syst.61 (2014),
115–125.
[47] DaxGerts,CourtneyD.Shelley,NidhiParikh,TravisPitts,ChrysmWatsonRoss,GeoffreyFairchild,NidiaYadriaVa-
quera Chavez, and Ashlynn R. Daughton. 2021. “Thought I’d share first” and other conspiracy theory tweets from
the COVID-19 infodemic: Exploratory study.JMIR Pub. Health Surveill.7, 4 (2021), e26527.
[48] LauraGiuffrida,HannaLokys,andOttoKlemm.2020.Assessingtheeffectofweatheronhumanoutdoorperception
using Twitter.Int. J. Biometeorol.64, 2 (2020), 205–216.
[49] Yikai Gong, Fengmin Deng, and Richard O. Sinnott. 2015. Identification of (near) real-time traffic congestion in the
cities of Australia through Twitter. InProceedings of UCUI. 7–12.
[50] IanGoodfellow,JeanPouget-Abadie,MehdiMirza,BingXu,DavidWarde-Farley,SherjilOzair,AaronCourville,and
Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial nets.Proc. NIPS27 (2014).
[51] Yiming Gu, Zhen Sean Qian, and Feng Chen. 2016. From Twitter to detector: Real-time traffic incident detection
using social media data.Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol.67 (2016), 321–342.
[52] William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Representation learning on graphs: Methods and applica-
tions. arXiv:1709.05584 (2017).
[53] Jingguang Han, Utsab Barman, Jer Hayes, Jinhua Du, Edward Burgin, and Dadong Wan. 2018. NextGen AML: Dis-
tributeddeeplearningbasedlanguagetechnologiestoaugmentantimoneylaunderinginvestigation.In Proceedings
of ACL System Demonstrations. 37–42.
[54] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of CVPR. 770–778.
[55] Olivier Henaff. 2020. Data-efficient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding. InProceedings of ICML.
PMLR, 4182–4192.
[56] AldoHernandez-Suarez,GabrielSanchez-Perez,KarinaToscano-Medina,HectorPerez-Meana,JosePortillo-Portillo,
VictorSanchez,andLuisJavierGarcíaVillalba.2019.UsingTwitterdatatomonitornaturaldisastersocialdynamics:
A recurrent neural network approach with word embeddings and kernel density estimation.Sensors 19, 7 (2019),
1746.
[57] Clyde Holsapple, Shih-Hui Hsiao, and Ram Pakath. 2014. Business social media analytics: Definition, benefits, and
challenges. InProceedings of AMCIS.
[58] Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
arXiv:1801.06146 (2018).
[59] Yulin Hswen, Qiuyuan Qin, John S. Brownstein, and Jared B. Hawkins. 2019. Feasibility of using social media to
monitor outdoor air pollution in London, England.Prev. Med.121 (2019), 86–93.
[60] Mochamad Ibrahim, Omar Abdillah, Alfan F. Wicaksono, and Mirna Adriani. 2015. Buzzer detection and sentiment
analysis for predicting presidential election results in a Twitter nation. InProceedings of ICDMW. IEEE, 1348–1353.
[61] Andrew Ilyas. 2014. MicroFilters: Harnessing Twitter for disaster management. InProceedings of GHTC. IEEE,
417–424.
[62] Muhammad Imran, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Sarah Vieweg. 2015. Processing social media messages in
mass emergency: A survey.ACM Comput. Surv.47, 4 (2015), 1–38.
[63] MuhammadImran,Carlos Castillo,JiLucas,PatrickMeier,andSarahVieweg.2014.AIDR:Artificialintelligencefor
disaster response. InProceedingsofWWW . 159–162.
[64] Muhammad Imran, Shady Elbassuoni, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Patrick Meier. 2013. Extracting informa-
tion nuggets from disaster-related messages in social media. InProceedings of ISCRAM.
[65] Muhammad Imran, Shady Elbassuoni, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Patrick Meier. 2013. Practical extraction
of disaster-relevant information from social media. InProceedings of WWW. 1021–1024.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 34 ---
77:34 R. Lamsal et al.
[66] S. Mo Jang and P. Sol Hart. 2015. Polarized frames on “climate change” and “global warming” across countries and
states: Evidence from Twitter big data.Glob. Environ. Change32 (2015), 11–17.
[67] Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Tuo Zhao. 2019. Smart: Robust
and efficient fine-tuning for pre-trained natural language models through principled regularized optimization.
arXiv:1911.03437 (2019).
[68] Longlong Jing and Yingli Tian. 2020. Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep neural networks: A survey.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.43, 11 (2020).
[69] Kenneth Joseph, Peter M. Landwehr, and Kathleen M. Carley. 2014. An approach to selecting keywords to track on
Twitter during a disaster. InProceedings of ISCRAM.
[70] VadimKagan,AndrewStevens,andV.S.Subrahmanian.2015.UsingTwittersentimenttoforecastthe2013Pakistani
election and the 2014 Indian election.IEEE Intell. Syst.30, 1 (2015), 2–5.
[71] Hyeon-Woo Kang and Hang-Bong Kang. 2017. Prediction of crime occurrence from multi-modal data using deep
learning. PloSOne 12, 4 (2017), e0176244.
[72] AmirKarami,VishalShah,RezaVaezi,andAmitBansal.2020.Twitterspeaks:Acaseofnationaldisastersituational
awareness.J. Inf. Sci.46, 3 (2020), 313–324.
[73] TakeoKatsuki,TimKenMackey,andRaphaelCuomo.2015.Establishingalinkbetweenprescriptiondrugabuseand
illicit online pharmacies: Analysis of Twitter data.J. Med. Internet Res.17, 12 (2015), e280.
[74] Wasiat Khan, Mustansar Ali Ghazanfar, Muhammad Awais Azam, Amin Karami, Khaled H. Alyoubi, and Ahmed S.
Alfakeeh.2020.Stockmarketpredictionusingmachinelearningclassifiersandsocialmedia,news. JAmbient.Intell.
Humaniz. Comput.(2020), 1–24.
[75] AndreiP.KirilenkoandSvetlanaO.Stepchenkova.2014.Publicmicrobloggingonclimatechange:OneyearofTwitter
worldwide.Glob. Environ. Change26 (2014), 171–182.
[76] Igor Kononenko. 2001.Machinelearning formedicaldiagnosis: History, stateof theartandperspective. Artif.Intell.
Med. 23, 1 (2001), 89–109.
[77] Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. 2019. Do better imagenet models transfer better? InProceedings
of CVPR. 2661–2671.
[78] Yury Kryvasheyeu, Haohui Chen, Nick Obradovich, Esteban Moro, Pascal Van Hentenryck, James Fowler, and
ManuelCebrian.2016.Rapidassessmentofdisasterdamageusingsocialmediaactivity. Sci.Adv. 2,3(2016),e1500779.
[79] AbhinavKumarandJyotiPrakashSingh.2019.Locationreferenceidentificationfromtweetsduringemergencies:A
deep learning approach.Int. J. Disast. Risk Reduct.33 (2019), 365–375.
[80] Srijan Kumar and Neil Shah. 2018. False information on web and social media: A survey. arXiv:1804.08559 (2018).
[81] EmaKušenandMarkStrembeck.2020.Youtalkin’tome?Exploringhuman/botcommunicationpatternsduringriot
events.Inf. Process. Manag.57, 1 (2020), 102126.
[82] RabindraLamsal.2020.Coronavirus(COVID-19)TweetsDataset. https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/coronavirus-
covid-19-tweets-dataset.
[83] Rabindra Lamsal. 2021. Design and analysis of a large-scale COVID-19 tweets dataset.Appl. Intell.51, 5 (2021),
2790–2804.
[84] RabindraLamsalandT.V.VijayKumar.2021.Twitter-baseddisasterresponseusingrecurrentnets. Int.J.Sociotechnol.
Knowl. Dev.13, 3 (2021), 133–150.
[85] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning.Nature 521, 7553 (2015), 436–444.
[86] DarrenLeitchandMohamedSherif.2017.Twittermood,CEOsuccessionannouncementsandstockreturns. J.Com-
put. Sci.21 (2017), 1–10.
[87] Jiawei Li, Qing Xu, Raphael Cuomo, Vidya Purushothaman, and Tim Mackey. 2020. Data mining and content anal-
ysis of the Chinese social media platform Weibo during the early COVID-19 outbreak: Retrospective observational
infoveillance study.JMIR Pub. Health Surveill.6, 2 (2020), e18700.
[88] LingLiu,JingWu,PingLi,andQingLi.2015.Asocial-media-basedapproachtopredictingstockcomovement. Expert
Syst. Appl.42, 8 (2015), 3893–3901.
[89] M Ángeles López-Cabarcos, Juan Piñeiro-Chousa, and Ada María Pérez-Pico. 2017. The impact technical and non-
technicalinvestorshaveonthestockmarket:Evidencefromthesentimentextractedfromsocialnetworks. J.Behav.
Exp. Finance15 (2017), 15–20.
[90] RavaliMamidi,MicheleMiller,TanviBanerjee,WilliamRomine,andAmitSheth.2019.Identifyingkeytopicsbearing
negative sentiment on Twitter: Insights concerning the 2015–2016 Zika epidemic.JMIR Pub. Health Surveill.5, 2
(2019), e11036.
[91] Lydia Manikonda, Ghazaleh Beigi, Huan Liu, and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2018. Twitter for sparking a movement,
Reddit for sharing the moment:# Metoo through the lens of social media. arXiv:1803.08022 (2018).
[92] ChristopherD.Manning.2015.Computationallinguisticsanddeeplearning. Comput.Linguist. 41,4(2015),701–707.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 35 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:35
[93] Shahir Masri, Jianfeng Jia, Chen Li, Guofa Zhou, Ming-Chieh Lee, Guiyun Yan, and Jun Wu. 2019. Use of Twitter
data to improve Zika virus surveillance in the United States during the 2016 epidemic.BMC Pub. Health19, 1 (2019),
1–14.
[94] AntonyMayfield.2008.Whatissocialmedia. https://indianstrategicknowledgeonline.com/web/mayfield_strat_for_
soc_media.pdf.
[95] Bryan McCann, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2017. Learned in translation: Contextualized
word vectors. arXiv:1708.00107 (2017).
[96] Patrick Meier. 2010. The unprecedented role of SMS in disaster response: Learning from Haiti.SAIS Rev. Int. Aff.30,
2 (2010), 91–103.
[97] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[98] TahoraH.Nazer,GuoliangXue,YushengJi,andHuanLiu.2017.Intelligentdisasterresponseviasocialmediaanalysis
as u rv e y .SIGKDD Explor.19, 1 (2017), 46–59.
[99] Venkata Kishore Neppalli, Cornelia Caragea, and Doina Caragea. 2018. Deep neural networks versus naive Bayes
classifiers for identifying informative tweets during disasters. InProceedings of ISCRAM.
[100] Venkata K. Neppalli, Cornelia Caragea, Anna Squicciarini, Andrea Tapia, and Sam Stehle. 2017. Sentiment analysis
during Hurricane Sandy in emergency response.Int. J. Disast. Risk Reduct.21 (2017), 213–222.
[101] DatNguyen,KamelaAliAlMannai,ShafiqJoty,HassanSajjad,MuhammadImran,andPrasenjitMitra.2017.Robust
classification of crisis-related data on social networks using convolutional neural networks. InProceedings of AAAI,
Vol. 11.
[102] Tahir M. Nisar and Man Yeung. 2018. Twitter as a tool for forecasting stock market movements: A short-window
event study.J. Financ. Data Sci.4, 2 (2018), 101–119.
[103] Yunmi Park, Minju Kim, and Kijin Seong. 2021. Happy neighborhoods: Investigating neighborhood conditions and
sentiments of a shrinking city with Twitter data.Growth Change52, 1 (2021), 539–566.
[104] Debjyoti Paul, Feifei Li, Murali Krishna Teja, Xin Yu, and Richie Frost. 2017. Compass: Spatio temporal sentiment
analysis of US election what Twitter says! InProceedings of SIGKDD. 1585–1594.
[105] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for word representa-
tion. InProceedings of EMNLP. 1532–1543.
[106] MatthewE.Peters,MarkNeumann,MohitIyyer,MattGardner,ChristopherClark,KentonLee,andLukeZettlemoyer.
2018. Deep contextualized word representations. InProceedings of NAACL.
[107] Nhathai Phan, Soon Ae Chun, Manasi Bhole, and James Geller. 2017. Enabling real-time drug abuse detection in
tweets. InProceedings of ICDE. IEEE, 1510–1514.
[108] C.A.Piña-GarcíaandLeticiaRamírez-Ramírez.2019.ExploringcrimepatternsinMexicocity. J.BigData 6,1(2019),
1–21.
[109] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standingbygenerativepre-training. https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/openai-assets/research-covers/language-
unsupervised/language_understanding_paper.pdf.
[110] ColinRaffel,NoamShazeer,AdamRoberts,KatherineLee,SharanNarang,MichaelMatena,YanqiZhou,WeiLi,and
Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. arXiv:1910.10683
(2019).
[111] J. Rexiline Ragini, P. M. Rubesh Anand, and Vidhyacharan Bhaskar. 2018. Big data analytics for disaster response
and recovery through sentiment analysis.Int. J. Inf. Manag.42 (2018), 13–24.
[112] Jishnu Ray Chowdhury, Cornelia Caragea, and Doina Caragea. 2019. Keyphrase extraction from disaster-related
tweets. InProceedings of WWW. 1555–1566.
[113] BerndResch,FlorianUsländer,andClemensHavas.2018.Combiningmachine-learningtopicmodelsandspatiotem-
poralanalysisofsocialmediadatafordisasterfootprintanddamageassessment. Cartogr.Geogr.Inf.Sci. 45,4(2018),
362–376.
[114] SvenRill,DirkReinel,JörgScheidt,andRobertoV.Zicari.2014.PoliTwi:Earlydetectionofemergingpoliticaltopics
on Twitter and the impact on concept-level sentiment analysis.Knowl.-based Syst.69 (2014), 24–33.
[115] Alina Ristea, Mohammad Al Boni, Bernd Resch, Matthew S. Gerber, and Michael Leitner. 2020. Spatial crime distri-
bution and prediction for sporting events using social media.Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci.34, 9 (2020), 1708–1739.
[116] Yara Rizk, Hadi Samer Jomaa, Mariette Awad, and Carlos Castillo. 2019. A computationally efficient multi-modal
classification approach of disaster-related Twitter images. InProceedings of SIGAPP. 2050–2059.
[117] Gonzalo A. Ruz, Pablo A. Henríquez, and Aldo Mascareño. 2020. Sentiment analysis of Twitter data during critical
events through Bayesian networks classifiers.Fut. Gen. Comput. Syst.106 (2020), 92–104.
[118] Sonya Sachdeva and Sarah McCaffrey. 2018. Using social media to predict air pollution during California wildfires.
InProceedings of SMSociety. 365–369.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 36 ---
77:36 R. Lamsal et al.
[119] Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka Matsuo. 2012. Tweet analysis for real-time event detection and earth-
quake reporting system development.IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data. Eng.25, 4 (2012), 919–931.
[120] SamehN.Saleh,ChristophU.Lehmann,SamuelA.McDonald,MujeebA.Basit,andRichardJ.Medford.2021.Under-
standing public perception of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) social distancing on Twitter.Infect. Contr. Hosp.
Epidemiol. 42, 2 (2021), 131–138.
[121] Abeed Sarker, Karen O’Connor, Rachel Ginn, Matthew Scotch, Karen Smith, Dan Malone, and Graciela Gonzalez.
2016.Socialmediaminingfortoxicovigilance:AutomaticmonitoringofprescriptionmedicationabusefromTwitter.
Drug Saf.39, 3 (2016), 231–240.
[122] Jose Ramon Saura, Pedro Palos-Sanchez, and Antonio Grilo. 2019. Detecting indicators for startup business success:
Sentiment analysis using text data mining.Sustainability 11, 3 (2019), 917.
[123] Burr Settles. 2009. Active learning literature survey.https://minds.wisconsin.edu/handle/1793/60660.
[124] Siqing Shan, Feng Zhao, Yigang Wei, and Mengni Liu. 2019. Disaster management 2.0: A real-time disaster damage
assessment model based on mobile social media data–A case study of Weibo (Chinese Twitter).Saf. Sci.115 (2019),
393–413.
[125] Parul Sharma and Teng-Sheng Moh. 2016. Prediction of Indian election using sentiment analysis on Hindi Twitter.
In Proceedings of BigData. IEEE, 1966–1971.
[126] CuihuaShen,AnfanChen,ChenLuo,JingwenZhang,BoFeng,andWangLiao.2020.Usingreportsofsymptomsand
diagnoses on social media to predict COVID-19 case counts in mainland China: Observational infoveillance study.
J. Med. Internet Res.22, 5 (2020), e19421.
[127] Lei Shi, Zhiyang Teng, Le Wang, Yue Zhang, and Alexander Binder. 2018. DeepClue: Visual interpretation of text-
based deep stock prediction.IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data. Eng.31, 6 (2018), 1094–1108.
[128] Lukas Shutler, Lewis S. Nelson, Ian Portelli, Courtney Blachford, and Jeanmarie Perrone. 2015. Drug use in the
Twittersphere: A qualitative contextual analysis of tweets about prescription drugs.J. Addict. Dis.34, 4 (2015),
303–310.
[129] Shiwangi Singh, Akshay Chauhan, and Sanjay Dhir. 2019. Analyzing the startup ecosystem of India: A Twitter ana-
lytics perspective.J. Adv. Manag. Res.17, 2 (2019).
[130] Panote Siriaraya, Yihong Zhang, Yuanyuan Wang, Yukiko Kawai, Mohit Mittal, Péter Jeszenszky, and Adam Jatowt.
2019. Witnessing crime through tweets: A crime investigation tool based on social media. InProceedings of SIGSPA-
TIAL. 568–571.
[131] MinSong,MeenChulKim,andYooKyungJeong.2014.Analyzingthepoliticallandscapeof2012Koreanpresidential
election in Twitter.IEEE Intell. Syst.29, 2 (2014), 18–26.
[132] Statista. 2021. Most Used Social Media 2021 | Statista. Retrieved fromhttps://www.statista.com/statistics/272014/
global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/ .
[133] Stefan Stieglitz and Linh Dang-Xuan. 2013. Social media and political communication: A social media analytics
framework.Soc. Netw. Anal. Min.3, 4 (2013), 1277–1291.
[134] ChristianSzegedy,VincentVanhoucke,SergeyIoffe,JonShlens,andZbigniewWojna.2016.Rethinkingtheinception
architecture for computer vision. InProceedings of CVPR. 2818–2826.
[135] LeiTangandHuanLiu.2010.Graphminingapplicationstosocialnetworkanalysis.In ManagingandMiningGraph
Data. Springer, 487–513.
[136] PriyamTejaswin,RohanKumar,andSiddharthGupta.2015.Tweetingtraffic:AnalyzingTwitterforgeneratingreal-
time city traffic insights and predictions. InProceedings of CODS-IKDD.1 – 4 .
[137] Andranik Tumasjan, Timm O. Sprenger, Philipp G. Sandner, and Isabell M. Welpe. 2011. Election forecasts with
Twitter: How 140 characters reflect the political landscape.Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev.29, 4 (2011), 402–418.
[138] AshishVaswani,NoamShazeer,NikiParmar,JakobUszkoreit,LlionJones,AidanN.Gomez,ŁukaszKaiser,andIllia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. InProceedings of NIPS. 5998–6008.
[139] ThanhVo,RohitSharma,RaghvendraKumar,LeHoangSon,BinhThaiPham,DieuTienBui,IshaaniPriyadarshini,
ManashSarkar,andTuongLe.2020.CrimeratedetectionusingsocialmediaofdifferentcrimelocationsandTwitter
part-of-speech tagger with Brown clustering.J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst.Preprint (2020), 1–13.
[140] LaraVomfell,WolfgangKarlHärdle,andStefanLessmann.2018.ImprovingcrimecountforecastsusingTwitterand
taxi data.Decis. Supp. Syst.113 (2018), 73–85.
[141] Athanasios Voulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Doulamis, and Eftychios Protopapadakis. 2018. Deep learn-
ing for computer vision: A brief review.Comput. Intell. Neurosci.2018 (2018).
[142] Di Wang, Ahmad Al-Rubaie, Sandra Stinčić Clarke, and John Davies. 2017. Real-time traffic event detection from
social media.ACM Trans. Internet Technol.18, 1 (2017), 1–23.
[143] Hao Wang, Doğan Can, Abe Kazemzadeh, François Bar, and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2012. A system for real-time
Twitter sentiment analysis of 2012 US presidential election cycle. InProceedings of ACL System Demonstrations.
115–120.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 37 ---
Socially Enhanced Situation Awareness from Microblogs using Artificial Intelligence 77:37
[144] LeiWangandJohnQ.Gan.2017.Predictionofthe2017FrenchelectionbasedonTwitterdataanalysis.In Proceedings
of CEEC. IEEE, 89–93.
[145] Mingjun Wang and Matthew S. Gerber. 2015. Using Twitter for next-place prediction, with an application to crime
prediction. InProceedings of SSCI. IEEE, 941–948.
[146] Rui Wang, Xuemeng Hu, Deyu Zhou, Yulan He, Yuxuan Xiong, Chenchen Ye, and Haiyang Xu. 2020. Neural topic
modeling with bidirectional adversarial training. InProceedings of ACL. 340–350.
[147] SenzhangWang,LifangHe,LeonStenneth,PhilipS.Yu,andZhoujunLi.2015.Citywidetrafficcongestionestimation
with social media. InProceedings SIGSPATIAL. 1–10.
[148] Xiaofeng Wang, Donald E. Brown, and Matthew S. Gerber. 2012. Spatio-temporal modeling of criminal incidents
using geographic, demographic, and Twitter-derived information. InProceedings of ISI. IEEE, 36–41.
[149] XiaofengWang,MatthewS. Gerber,andDonaldE.Brown.2012.Automaticcrimepredictionusing eventsextracted
from Twitter posts. InProceedings of SBP-BRiMS. Springer, 231–238.
[150] XinyiWangandYiYang.2020.Neuraltopicmodelwithattentionforsupervisedlearning.In ProceedingsofAISTATS .
PMLR, 1147–1156.
[151] Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni. 2020. Generalizing from a few examples: A survey
on few-shot learning.ACM Comput. Surv.53, 3 (2020), 1–34.
[152] WeiWei,YuexinMao,andBingWang.2016.Twittervolumespikesandstockoptionspricing. Comput.Commun. 73
(2016), 271–281.
[153] Xiaocong Wei, Hongfei Lin, Liang Yang, and Yuhai Yu. 2017. A convolution-LSTM-based deep neural network for
cross-domain MOOC forum post classification.Information 8, 3 (2017), 92.
[154] Weibo. 2021. Weibo API. Retrieved fromhttps://open.weibo.com/wiki/.
[155] Desheng Wu and Yiwen Cui. 2018. Disaster early warning and damage assessment analysis using social media data
and geo-location information.Decis. Supp. Syst.111 (2018), 48–59.
[156] Yingcai Wu, Nan Cao, David Gotz, Yap-Peng Tan, and Daniel A. Keim. 2016. A survey on visual analytics of social
media data.IEEE Trans. Multim.18, 11 (2016), 2135–2148.
[157] Yumo Xu and Shay B. Cohen. 2018. Stock movement prediction from tweets and historical prices. InProceedings of
ACL. 1970–1979.
[158] Jia Xue, Junxiang Chen, Chen Chen, Ran Hu, and Tingshao Zhu. 2020. The hidden pandemic of family violence
during COVID-19: Unsupervised learning of Tweets.J. Med. Internet Res.22, 11 (2020), e24361.
[159] IkuyaYamada,AkariAsai,HiroyukiShindo,HideakiTakeda,andYujiMatsumoto.2020.LUKE:Deepcontextualized
entity representations with entity-aware self-attention. arXiv:2010.01057 (2020).
[160] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V. Le. 2019. XLNet: Gener-
alized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. arXiv:1906.08237 (2019).
[161] Weiran Yao and Sean Qian. 2021. From Twitter to traffic predictor: Next-day morning traffic prediction using social
media data.Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol.124 (2021), 102938.
[162] Ussama Yaqub, Soon Ae Chun, Vijayalakshmi Atluri, and Jaideep Vaidya. 2017. Analysis of political discourse on
Twitter in the context of the 2016 US presidential elections.Gov. Inf. Quart.34, 4 (2017), 613–626.
[163] Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep neural net-
works? arXiv:1411.1792 (2014).
[164] Wanhai You, Yawei Guo, and Cheng Peng. 2017. Twitter’s daily happiness sentiment and the predictability of stock
returns.Finance Res. Lett.23 (2017), 58–64.
[165] Juntao Yu, Bernd Bohnet, and Massimo Poesio. 2020. Named entity recognition as dependency parsing.
arXiv:2005.07150 (2020).
[166] Kiran Zahra, Muhammad Imran, and Frank O. Ostermann. 2020. Automatic identification of eyewitness messages
on Twitter during disasters.Inf. Process. Manag.57, 1 (2020), 102107.
[167] WeixinZhaiandChengqiCheng.2020.Alongshort-termmemoryapproachtopredictingairqualitybasedonsocial
media data.Atmos. Environ.237 (2020), 117411.
[168] WeiZhai,Zhong-RenPeng,andFaxiYuan.2020.Examinetheeffectsofneighborhoodequityondisastersituational
awareness: Harness machine learning and geotagged Twitter data.Int. J. Disast. Risk Reduct.48 (2020), 101611.
[169] Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. 2021. Scaling vision transformers.
arXiv:2106.04560 (2021).
[170] Dejiao Zhang, Feng Nan, Xiaokai Wei, Shangwen Li, Henghui Zhu, Kathleen McKeown, Ramesh Nallapati, Andrew
Arnold, and Bing Xiang. 2021. Supporting clustering with contrastive learning. arXiv:2103.12953 (2021).
[171] Wei Zhang, Xiao Li, Dehua Shen, and Andrea Teglio. 2016. Daily happiness and stock returns: Some international
evidence.Physica A460 (2016), 201–209.
[172] Xue Zhang, Hauke Fuehres, and Peter A. Gloor. 2012. Predicting asset value through Twitter buzz. InProceedings of
AISC. Springer, 23–34.
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.

--- PAGE 38 ---
77:38 R. Lamsal et al.
[173] JieZhou,GanquCui,ShengdingHu,ZhengyanZhang,ChengYang,ZhiyuanLiu,LifengWang,ChangchengLi,and
Maosong Sun. 2020. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications.AI Open1 (2020), 57–81.
[174] Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2018. A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning.Nat. Sci. Rev.5, 1 (2018), 44–53.
[175] Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong, and Qing He. 2020.
A comprehensive survey on transfer learning.Proc. IEEE109, 1 (2020), 43–76.
[176] Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva, Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. 2018. Detection and resolution of
rumours in social media: A survey.ACM Comput. Surv.51, 2 (2018), 1–36.
[177] OvidiuŞerban,NicholasThapen,BrendanMaginnis,ChrisHankin,andVirginiaFoot.2019.Real-timeprocessingof
socialmediawithSENTINEL:Asyndromicsurveillancesystemincorporatingdeeplearningforhealthclassification.
Inf. Process. Manag.56, 3 (2019), 1166–1184.
Received 17 July 2021; revised 31 January 2022; accepted 8 March 2022
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 55, No. 4, Article 77. Publication date: November 2022.